Human trafficking scholar Louise Shelley opens arguably the most disconcerting chapter
of her book Human Trafficking: A Global Perspective with John Dunn’s lines:
“No man is an island, every man is a piece of the continent, a part of the main [...] any
man’s death diminishes me, because I am involved in mankind.”
Despite the challenges endemic to political science research, I am continuously inspired by the way it demands our humanity to overcome even seemingly insurmountable injustices through creative innovation. My love for statistical modeling and experimental design has inspired me to apply to Stanford’s Political Science Ph.D. program, where I hope to study Research Methods, International Relations, and Comparative Politics in preparation for a career in academic research and teaching.
I recently graduated from Emory University with a double-major in Quantitative Science and English & Creative Writing. Emory’s Quantitative Science program allowed me to build my computational toolkit through courses ranging from regression analysis and advanced econometrics to calculus, linear algebra, and research methods. Extensive programming labs and research projects allowed me to tailor my education to my topical and regional interests. As a final research project for a human trafficking seminar, I used regression analysis and Seo-Young Cho’s 3P human trafficking measure to study the impacts of changes in trafficking profits on human trafficking levels in Moldova. For a human rights course, I analyzed the effects of varying styles of qualitative human trafficking research on the portrayal of trafficking within former Soviet states.
To expand my knowledge of Soviet influences on modern gender violence norms, I worked with Dr. Nathan Tintle, Dr. Luralyn Helming, and a small team of fellow undergraduates on two National Science Foundation-funded research studies with a Ukrainian sample. The first study, which I presented at Dordt College and the 2018 National Conference for Undergraduate Research, used binary logistic regression and adjusted odds ratios to analyze PTSD risk factors for Ukrainian adults and PTSD’s impact on daily functioning. The second study, presented at the University of Central Iowa and Dordt College, studied how childhood exposure and/or perpetration of various categories of violence impacted future risk of domestic violence.
Seeking to expand my knowledge of human trafficking to other regions, I composed a research report analyzing the structural causes contributing to human trafficking in Bangladesh using International Political Economy and feminist theories. Additionally, as an intern at The Carter Center, I composed research reports on the political and social climate of Bangladesh, especially as it related to child marriage, women’s access to economic resources, and the Rohingya refugee crisis. My last year at Emory, I had the opportunity to take a Quantitative Science course that was cross-listed as a Political Science Research Methods Ph.D. course. In this course, I received technical instruction on statistical research methods as they apply to randomized controlled trials in field research using the techniques discussed by Alan Gerber and Donald Green in Field Experiments. Through a grant opportunity, a classmate and I designed and conducted an immigration opinion survey experiment on Amazon Mechanical Turk. In an effort to build upon several of Jens Hainmelluer’s recent studies (Hainmueller and Hopkins 2015; Hainmueller and Hiscox 2010), the experiment used paired profile conjoint analysis to test the effects of vignette exposure on U.S. survey respondents’ attitudes towards immigrants.
Since graduating this past May, I have sought to expand my research experience by working as an International Research Associate for Mathematica Policy Research. Through this position, I conduct a variety of programming, project management, and qualitative research tasks
1
Madison Dalton, Department of Political Science
for Millennial Challenge Corporation and foundation projects. As part of a Ghana road infrastructure improvement project, I created a program to query travel time and traffic information from Google Maps at regular intervals for a month and have been tasked with analyzing the resulting data. I have also been serving as Multidisciplinary Research Fellow for the anti-trafficking non-profit organization Love Justice International (LJI). Through this position I have been using data collected by LJI to develop a scientific model for selecting optimal trafficking transit monitoring locations. I have also been researching ways to improve LJI’s women’s empowerment, microfinance, and educational programs, in addition to developing quasi-experimental methods to measure the effectiveness of these programs.
At Stanford, I would build upon these past experiences by researching causes of and solutions to structural inequalities that exacerbate vulnerabilities in socially marginalized groups, especially those groups that are at increased risk of human trafficking. The central role structural inequality and economic vulnerability play in increasing marginalized groups’ risk of trafficking and violence has been well-documented (Caprioli, M. 2005; Shamin, Ishrat 2010; Neumayer, Eric and Thomas Plümper 2007). However, questions remain regarding the precise mechanisms by which structural inequality leads to experience of violence and the ways in which discriminatory norms can be dismantled. In an effort to overcome replicability and continuity challenges in the current literature, I hope to conduct region-specific, multi-arm analyses using a variety of data. Some questions that interest me include: What is the underlying cause of social norms that lead to structural violence against women, ethnic and religious minorities, and refugees? Are these norms most caustic when propagated by peers, guardians, politicians, educational institutions, or economic institutions? To what degree is the feminization of poverty a consequence of direct economic discrimination? To what degree is such feminization the consequence of cultural microaggressions that lead women and minorities to self-sort out of the more profitable job markets? Why do certain microfinance campaigns work in some contexts, but not in others? Moreover, given scholars’ recent success in using machine learning to match refugees with employment opportunities in developed countries (Bansak, Kirk et al. 2018), how can machine learning be used to match trafficking survivors and those at high risk of human trafficking with job resources within their own communities? Great progress has been made in developing broad measures of human trafficking and gender empowerment (Cho, Seo-Young 2015; Frank, Richard 2013), but how can we employ community-level data collection to gauge the success of certain anti-trafficking and gender empowerment interventions?
I am confident the Stanford Political Science Ph.D. program’s strong methods curriculum, skilled faculty, and opportunities offered through the Stanford Center on Global Poverty and Development and the Immigration Policy Lab would empower me to answer these questions. In addition to being an avid admirer of Jens Hainmeuller’s immigration and economics research, I am interested in Michael Phillip Tomz and Beatriz Magaloni’s research on poverty reduction and international development
I would be honored to join Stanford’s community of committed and admirably curious political science scholars. I firmly
believe this program would challenge me to develop innovative solutions to even the most daunting challenges in social science research. Thank you for your consideration.