
I present a new method of interpreting voter preferences in settings where policy remains in effect until replaced by new
legislation. In such settings voters consider not only the utility they receive from a given policy today, but also the utility they
will receive from policies likely to replace that policy in the future. The model can be used to characterize both long-term
preferences and distributions over policy outcomes in situations where policy is ongoing and voters are farsighted.

“[W]e’re unprepared for the consequences of win-
ning. Winning in court too soon could mean losing
in the court of public opinion, in Congress and
under the United States Constitution.” —Matt
Coles, Director of the ACLU Lesbian and Gay
Rights Project, quoted in The New York Times on
November 12, 2004.1

F ollowing the 2004 elections in which 11 states

passed constitutional amendments banning gay
marriage, gay rights groups began a concerted pub-
lic effort to change their political strategy. The groups
decided to temporarily retreat from what they had pre-
viously claimed to be their most important goal: win-
ning the right for same-sex marriages. The reason for this
move was simple. The groups realized that a challenge to
such amendments in federal court was a risky proposi-
tion, regardless of whether the challenge was successful
or not. An unfavorable court decision would establish a
legal precedent that could be invoked in future cases. A
favorable court decision could easily accelerate public and
legislative support for a federal constitutional amendment
banning same-sex marriage outright.

Political choice in the short term often involves long-
term considerations because, as the above story demon-
strates, decisions made today can greatly affect the types
of decisions that are feasible tomorrow. Given the impor-
tance that individuals place on long-term outcomes, an

essential step in understanding strategic voting behavior is
understanding the future consequences of policy choice.
These consequences are particularly relevant when poli-
cies remain in effect for an indefinite period of time, or
are “continuing.” A continuing program, as opposed to
a once-and-for-all program, is a policy that continues in
effect until it is changed by new legislation.2 When such
a policy is enacted we can think of it as producing a path-
dependent stream of future legislation, with the status quo
at any given time being the extant legislation at that time.
Because of the long-term nature of these programs, they
are often of particular interest to legislators, activists, and
voters. Such programs include entitlements, social pol-
icy, and redistributive programs, with specific examples
being minimum wage laws, social security benefits, the
regulation of public health concerns such as air quality
and automobile safety, and eligibility requirements for
social welfare programs.

Decisions over continuing programs frequently af-
fect the future choices that are available to a group; for
example, it can be politically difficult to reinstate a tax
once it has been repealed, to lower levels of entitlement
spending, or to revoke a law concerning public safety.
When legislators evaluate such policies they do so with
an eye toward what the policy is likely to produce over
time. There is therefore no reason to expect that legisla-
tive bargaining over a continuing program will be similar
to legislative bargaining over a once-and-for-all program.


While the behavior of a legislator may depend largely on
his immediate preferences, it may also depend on how
he sees today’s choice as affecting future decisions. This
tension between short- and long-term interests is my pri-
mary focus.

In this article I develop a model of bargaining over
continuing programs in which individuals rank policies
not only on the basis of the utility they yield today, but
also with respect to the types of alternatives they will likely
lead to in the future. The model differs from much of the
bargaining literature in that the bargaining process does
not end once a policy has been agreed upon, as in Baron
and Ferejohn (1989). Instead, the chosen policy becomes
the reversion point of the next round of bargaining and
remains in effect until it is replaced by a new alternative.3
The model is used to both characterize voting behavior
when individuals are farsighted and to characterize the
types of policies that will emerge when programs are
continuing.

The theory developed here captures several impor-
tant features of politics that may not be captured in a
one-shot model of bargaining. First, farsighted voters
are not indifferent between different policies that pro-
vide them with the same level of utility. This is because
the space of alternatives that defeats a given policy, and
that a given policy defeats, will differ substantively across
policies. This model demonstrates that in dynamic envi-
ronments, the space of alternatives that can and cannot
defeat a policy may have as much impact on individual
decision making as the substance of the policy itself. And
second, farsighted voters will take the preferences of oth-
ers into account when voting, not because of a behavioral
assumption such as altruism or inequality aversion, but
because the preferences of others will matter when passing
future legislation. This implies that changing the prefer-
ences of a single voter will change the strategic behavior of
every other voter in a predictable way. While both of these
features hold true in any dynamic game, the goal of this
article is to not only characterize individual behavior on
an equilibrium path, but also to characterize farsighted
individual preferences in general. Most importantly, this
model calculates a general induced utility function for each
player that captures his evaluation of every policy in terms
of what it is likely to produce over time.

The article begins with several general existence re-
sults. I then apply the model to a number of standard
legislative settings, including a one-dimensional spatial
model, a divide-the-dollar game, and a two-dimensional

3Baron (1996), Kalandrakis (2004), and Riboni (2008), among oth-
ers, have also examined repeated bargaining games with endoge-
nous reversion points. This literature will be discussed the next
section.

37

spatial model in which players have either circular or
elliptical preferences. I find that the theory is capable
of making sharp predictions in each of these legislative
settings, with the predicted outcomes frequently corre-
sponding to policies that divide benefits fairly between
like-minded individuals. Thus, while the model is in-
tended specifically to analyze individual vote choice, it
could also be interpreted as a model of endogenous party,
or coalition, formation. The coalitions that tend to emerge
consist of those individuals whose preferences are most
similar, either in terms of spatial distance or intensity of
preference. Furthermore, farsighted individuals tend to
favor policies that yield equitable distributions of payoffs,
and frequently vote for certain normatively “fair” alter-
natives over their own ideal points. Relatedly, farsighted
voters may shy away from implementing an inefficient
Condorcet winner in favor of implementing a more effi-
cient cycle of alternatives over time; thus farsighted voters
may willingly concede utility in the short term for more
beneficial policy outcomes later on.

The article proceeds as follows: The first section de-
scribes the notation used and presents the model. This
section also discusses related work and presents the no-
tion of a dynamically stable voting equilibrium, the equi-
librium concept used in the analysis of the model. The
second section presents several results about equilibrium
existence that constitute the main theoretical contribu-
tion of the article. When the policy space is finite, I show
that there always exists an equilibrium. When the policy
space is infinite then there exists an equilibrium under cer-
tain conditions, and when the number of players is large
the equilibrium is unique. Furthermore, I demonstrate
that equilibrium behavior in this model is consistent with
Bayesian Markov-perfect equilibrium behavior. This sec-
tion also examines two analytic examples of the model in
the setting of a finite policy space and shows that Con-
dorcet winners may not arise as policy outcomes when
voters are farsighted. The third section considers applica-
tions of the model to spatial voting games and presents
several numerical results. The final section concludes.

The Model

There is a collection of voters N = {1, 2 , . . . , n} and a
compact set X ⊂ Rm of alternatives, or policies. X can
be either finite or infinite. For each voter i ∈ N, pref-
erences are represented by a real-valued utility function,
ui : X → [u
∈ R. When the set of poli-
¯
cies is infinite I also assume that these utility functions

, ¯u], for some ¯u, u
¯

38

are differentiable and that their derivatives are uniformly
bounded by some constant U.
A subset C ⊆ N is called a coalition of voters. Coali-
tions that are large enough to enact a policy are called
decisive, or winning. The collection of winning coalitions
is W. It is simply assumed that this collection W is mono-
tonic and proper. Monotonicity implies that if C ∈ W and
(cid:7) ∈ W , or that adding people to a deci-
C ⊂ C
sive coalition yields another decisive coalition. Properness
implies that if C ∈ W , then N\C (cid:8)∈ W, or that any two
decisive coalitions must have at least one individual in
common.

, then C

(cid:7)

Path of Play and Related Literature

The legislative process is modeled as a sequence of sessions
in which votes on policy occur. In each round the status
quo is determined by the bargaining outcome of the pre-
vious round. A policy to be pitted against the status quo
arises exogenously in each round. This policy is drawn
from a probability density Q. A vote then occurs between
this policy and the status quo. Every voter receives a payoff
from the winning policy and this policy then becomes the
status quo of the next round of bargaining. This process
is pictured in Figure 1.

The probabilistic and exogenous nature of the pro-
posal process distinguishes this model from Baron (1996),
Baron and Herron (2003), Kalandrakis (2004), Duggan
and Kalandrakis (2007), Baron, Diermeier, and Fong
(2007), and Riboni (2008) and warrants a short discus-
sion. Baron, Baron and Herron, Kalandrakis, and Kalan-
drakis and Duggan analyze repeated bargaining games
with endogenous reversion points. In these papers a player
is selected at random to make a proposal in each round.
The proposal is pitted against the status quo, with the
winning alternative becoming the status quo in the next
round of bargaining. Baron looks at the case of a unidi-
mensional policy space and finds that outcomes converge
to the ideal point of the median voter. Baron and Herron
consider a two-dimensional policy space, three players,
and a finite horizon, and numerically compute equilib-
ria. Kalandrakis examines a three-player divide-the-dollar
game and finds that a Markov perfect equilibrium of the
game is characterized by a situation where the proposer
in every round proposes the entire dollar for himself,
and this allocation is approved by a majority of players.
Duggan and Kalandrakis extend the model to multidi-
mensional space and a very general preference and voting
environment. In addition to proving the existence of pure
strategy stationary Markov perfect equilibria, they pro-
vide an algorithm for computing equilibria numerically.

ELIZABETH MAGGIE PENN

FIGURE 1 Path of Play

Status quo

x

Policy y drawn
from density Q

Vote between 

x and y

y wins

Status quo

y

x wins

Status quo

x

Policy z drawn
from density Q

Policy z drawn
from density Q

Vote between

x and z

Vote between 

y and z

.
.
.

.
.
.

Riboni considers a similar model in which policy changes
are proposed by a strategic agenda setter (who is not a
member of the voting body), and then voted upon by a
committee.

In the context of political economy, this article is re-
lated at a more general level to recent articles by Battaglini
and Coate (2007, 2008) that examine the dynamics of tax-
ation and public spending. In these articles, policymaking
periods are linked by endogenous levels of public goods
and public debt, respectively. Krusell and R´ıos-Rull (1996)
also study the connection between current and future
policies in a model of economic growth and stagnation.
The equilibrium concept they develop is related to the
concept utilized in this article, in that voters forecast the
effects of the present political climate on the future. Agents
in their model vote via majority rule on the regulation of
new production technologies and may decide whether or
not to accumulate skill in a given technology. Another
recent line of research, including papers by Cho (2008),
Baron, Diermeier, and Fong (2007), and Fong (2006),
has built upon Baron and Diermeier’s (2001) model of
parliamentary systems under proportional representa-
tion. While differing in various institutional specifics such
as the role of elections, issue dimensionality, formateur

FARSIGHTED VOTING

selection, and number of policymaking rounds, these
models consider the incentives for political coalitions to
form and implement policy when these choices affect
subsequent government formation cycles.

All of these papers differ from my article in an im-
portant respect. While each of these papers is concerned
primarily with predicting equilibrium policy outcomes
and voter behavior on the path of play, the goal of this
article is to model voter preferences over all alternatives
when voters evaluate policies in terms of what they are
likely to produce over time. By separating voting strate-
gies from the policy proposal process, results about far-
sighted preferences and behavior are easier to interpret.
For example, in Penn (2003) I endogenize the proposal
process in this model by allowing randomly drawn play-
ers to make proposals themselves. The numerical results I
find are similar to those found by Kalandrakis (2004) and
suggest that Kalandrakis’s result that a legislative dictator
emerges with certainty in every round is likely an effect
of the particular endogenous proposal process assumed.4
The assumption of an exogenous and probabilistic
process by which future proposals are generated reflects
the notion that legislators are not certain of the policy pro-
posals that will be brought to the floor in the future, but
are aware of the current political climate and have priors
over the distribution of future proposals. While “endoge-
nous” is frequently interpreted as being more realistic
than “exogenous” in any game-theoretic model, the as-
sumption of an exogenous agenda here makes the model
easier to interpret, easier to apply to different situations,
and, I argue, more realistic. This is because an agenda
in this setting will depend on a number of complex fac-
tors (recognition rules, special interest, and constituency
pressures; the ordering of the legislative calendar; party
control; etc.) that are beyond the scope of this model. For
example, in game-theoretic models it is generally assumed
that legislators are randomly recognized to propose alter-
natives to the floor via a particular recognition rule. This
assumption yields a very specific kind of strategic agenda-
setting process that is separate from the goal of this article,
which is simply to model voter preferences in an environ-
ment where policies are replaced by new policies over
time.

Roberts (2007), Dougherty and Edward (2008), and
Compte and Jehiel (2008) study similar bargaining prob-
lems with randomly generated offers. Roberts considers

4In different work, Kalandrakis (2006) examines the importance
of proposal rights in determining political power. He obtains the
interesting result that any distribution of power can be obtained
by simply manipulating proposal rights in a particular bargain-
ing environment. The same is not true when manipulating other
institutional features of the bargaining game, such as voting rights.

39

a setting where policymaking is continuing, and every
alternative is equally likely to be brought to the floor.
Dougherty and Edward compare the ability of majority
and unanimity rules to attain Pareto efficient outcomes
when proposals may be generated at random and find
that majority rule dominates unanimity rule in this re-
gard. Compte and Jehiel assume the bargaining process
ends when a certain number of players accept the random
offer. They examine the effect of patience, the number of
players, and the majority requirement and find that as the
majority requirement increases more efficient outcomes
are generated, but that it also takes longer to reach agree-
ment. They motivate their random proposal process with
the argument that it is rare for any individual or group to
have full control over an agenda-setting process, and that
even if a person did have full control over proposals, it
would be difficult for him to perfectly target a collection of
specific payoffs for the other players. They also find that
simplifying the proposal process in such a way enables
them to better analyze many empirical regularities that
have not been supported by previous bargaining prob-
lems; for example, the fact that agreement is frequently
more difficult to obtain when unanimous consent is
required.

Dynamically Stable Voting Equilibria

This section presents the model of farsighted voter prefer-
ences. Utility function ui(x) represents Player i’s one-shot
payoff from policy x when x is enacted today. However,
if Player i is farsighted then he not only cares about his
payoff from having x enacted today, but also his future
payoffs from the policies that will ultimately replace x.
Let Player i’s value function be denoted vi , where
vi : X → R. This function represents the discounted sum
of utility Player i can expect to receive from having policy
x enacted today, given that a stream of policies will be en-
acted after x. Let v = {vi}i∈N be the collection of all voter
value functions, with V n being the space of all value func-
tions (so that v ∈ V n). In equilibrium each voter will as-
sign a “true” long-term value to every policy. This means
that players will vote based on their equilibrium value
functions and by voting this way they ultimately generate
those same functions.

In equilibrium, value functions capture a consistency
between beliefs and behavior; when a player behaves ac-
cording to such a function, the value he assigns to a pol-
icy equals the true future expected value of that policy.
When this holds for all players, then the vote strategies of
players generate value functions that generate those same
vote strategies. Thus, beliefs and behavior are entirely

consistent with each other. The following equilibrium
concept captures this idea.

Definition: A dynamically stable voting equilibrium is a
collection of value functions, v∗ = {v∗
}i∈N , such that for
all i ∈ N and x ∈ X,

i

(cid:2)

(cid:3)

i (x) = ui (x) + ␦
v∗

y∈X
i (x)( p(v∗

+ v∗

v∗
i (y) p(v∗
(y), v∗

(x)))

(x), v∗
(cid:4)

Q(y).

(y))

The case of an infinite X is defined analogously.5

The function ui(x) equals the utility Player i receives
from alternative x in one period. The probability that pol-
icy y will defeat status quo x is denoted p(v(x), v(y)). This
function is simply assumed to be the probability that a
winning coalition votes for y over x, given that every voter
knows that policy selection will continue into the future.
Thus voting decisions are made based on voters’ value
functions and not their utility functions (i.e., voters are
farsighted). The specific functional form of p(v(x), v(y))
can be found in Appendix A; it is simply the probability
of victory of y over x.

Q is the probability mass from which alternatives y to
be pitted against the status quo are drawn. As discussed
earlier, Q represents the fixed beliefs that voters have over
the types of alternatives that will be brought to the floor
in the future. These beliefs could be uniform over all al-
ternatives (uninformative) or could be generated by fixed
external pressures from political parties, special interests,
constituencies, or simply the current political climate.
While Q is assumed to be independent of the current sta-
tus quo x, a similar model could be constructed where
Q is conditioned on x. This construction would not dra-
matically change the analytic results of the model, but is
omitted for ease of exposition.6 When the set X is infinite,
Q is instead a density. In this case, Q is assumed to have
full support, and to be differentiable in y.
␦ ∈ [0, 1) is a discount factor that represents players’
time preferences. When ␦ is high, voters place greater rel-
ative weight on the future. For notational simplicity ␦ is
assumed to be common for all players, but this assump-
tion does not affect any of the analytic results.

One feature of this model that differentiates it from
an endogenous proposal model is that the probability of
victory of y over x, or p(v(x), v(y)), is averaged over all
decisive coalitions. Alternatively, when proposals are en-
dogenous the proposer does two things: he chooses an

5As the value function depends on the distribution from which
i (x | Q).
proposals are drawn, or Q, v
6It would require a stronger assumption than Assumption 1 in
order to prove existence when X is infinite (Proposition 2).

∗
i (x) could also be written v

∗

ELIZABETH MAGGIE PENN

alternative to propose, and he identifies a particular de-
cisive coalition to target his proposal to. Therefore, when
proposals are endogenous, policy outcomes will typically
change at every round of voting unless the status quo is the
proposer’s ideal point. However, in this model, because
winning coalitions are no longer uniquely determined
but instead are averaged over, a consequence is that uni-
versalistic, or close to universalistic, majorities can arise
given particular policy pairings. Thus, policy will remain
at more desirable status quos for longer, and undesirable
policies will be replaced quickly.

To summarize this section, the above model charac-
terizes long-term individual preferences in a setting where
policies are repeatedly being challenged and replaced by
new alternatives. In a given round a transition from status
quo x to new policy y is dependent upon two factors. First,
policy y must be chosen to be pitted against status quo x
from density Q. Second, voters must choose policy y over
status quo x, and the probability that y defeats x when in-
finitely more rounds remain is denoted p(v(x), v(y)). The
function vi (x) represents i’s discounted expected sum of
utility when x is enacted today, given that infinitely more
rounds of policy selection will occur. This equals ui(x),
or i’s utility from x today, plus the discounted expected
value of what x will ultimately lead to in the future.

Analytic Results and Examples

In the sections that follow, I will provide examples of
dynamically stable voting equilibria in specific settings.
The goal of this section is to provide more general re-
sults about the types of environments in which we can
expect dynamically stable voting equilibria to exist and to
be unique. Recall that an equilibrium in this setting is a
collection of value functions such that, when individuals
vote according to these functions, individual valuations
of policies equal the true future expected values of those
policies. Therefore, we are looking for fixed points in a
mapping from one value function into another. Mathe-
matically, this is different from a more standard game-
theoretic setup in which we look for fixed points in action
profiles. The difference stems from the fact that while
value functions (which are necessarily cardinal) will yield
action profiles, action profiles do not provide us with
enough information to give us back cardinal valuations.
Therefore, stronger conditions are required in order to
obtain equilibrium existence in this setup than in a stan-
dard game-theoretic setup.7

7In particular, the difficulties with equilibrium existence here are
mathematically similar to difficulties in obtaining existence in
games with continuous action spaces.

FARSIGHTED VOTING

Propositions 1, 2, and 3 all focus on the problem
of equilibrium existence. Although the voting behavior
of players is purposefully left unspecified in this model,
individual behavior is implicit in the definition of the
function p(v(x), v(y)), or the probability of victory of
y over x. While p is defined formally in Appendix A, let
the probability that individual i (with value function vi )
votes for y over x be denoted pi(vi (x), vi (y)). The three
existence results all require that this probability be con-
tinuous in vi for all individuals i, or that individuals vote
probabilistically. Probabilistic voting is defined formally
in Appendix A. However, while probabilistic voting is suf-
ficient for equilibrium existence in many cases, it is not
necessary in order to find equilibria of the model. The
following sections provide several examples of equilibria
in situations where individuals vote deterministically.

Many authors have invoked the assumption of prob-
abilistic behavior on the part of voters (see Banks and
Duggan 2004; Coughlin 1992; McKelvey and Patty 2006;
and Schofield 2004), with the implication being that mod-
els of behavior are incapable of perfectly predicting vote
choice, and that this reality should be incorporated into
the calculations of voters. This model is consistent with
the more game-theoretic formulation of probabilistic vot-
ing adopted by McKelvey and Patty (2006). As in their
setup, and opposed to some more classic models of prob-
abilistic voting, the expected payoff of casting a vote is
represented correctly for each voter.8 In other words, in-
dividuals vote with the knowledge that other voters are
also behaving probabilistically. As in other recent work
on the topic, the assumption of probabilistic voting in
this model is consistent with pure strategy equilibrium
behavior in a Bayesian framework in which individuals
receive privately observed payoff shocks for each possible
action or vote. This formulation of probabilistic voting,
and in particular, the effect of these random payoff dis-
turbances on individual vote functions pi, is presented in
Appendix A.

The three existence results require various conditions
on individual vote functions pi.9 Proposition 1 simply
proves that when the alternative space X is finite and
individuals vote probabilistically, an equilibrium exists.
Proposition 3 proves that when individuals vote proba-
bilistically, then a unique equilibrium will exist when the
number of players is large enough, regardless of whether
X is finite or infinite. Proposition 2 proves that an equilib-

8Relatedly, McKelvey and Patty also require the size of the electorate
to be “large enough” in order to characterize their equilibrium.

9Alternatively, as discussed in Appendix A, these assumptions can
be thought of as requirements on the distribution of individuals’
privately observed random payoff disturbances.

41

rium will exist when X is infinite and there are any number
of players, but requires that the derivative of p be bounded
by a particular constant. This implies that individual
behavior is sufficiently probabilistic. In Appendix A
this constant is defined both generally (Assumption 1)
and more specifically for the case of a logit agent quantal
response equilibrium. All proofs of the propositions can
be found in Appendix B.

Proposition 1. If X is finite, then there exists a dy-
namically stable voting equilibrium when individuals vote
probabilistically.

Proposition 2. If X is infinite, then there exists a dynami-
cally stable voting equilibrium when individuals vote “suf-
ficiently probabilistically,” or individual behavior is not too
responsive to payoffs.

Proposition 3. If the number of voters is “large enough”
then there always exists a unique dynamically stable equi-
librium provided that individuals vote probabilistically, re-
gardless of whether X is finite or infinite.

To understand why additional requirements on tran-
sition probabilities p are needed to generally prove exis-
tence when X is infinite, note that the set of all functions
over a finite alternative space is a finite-dimensional vec-
tor space, while the set of all functions over an infinite and
compact subset of Rm is a function space. Compactness
of the space of value functions is generally needed in or-
der to find a fixed point. While any closed and bounded
subset of a finite-dimensional vector space is compact,
closed and bounded sets of functions are rarely compact.
Proposition 2 is proved by showing that the set of value
functions is equicontinuous, and thus compact, when a
certain restriction (Assumption 1 described above) on the
derivative of transition probability p holds.

Proposition 3 proves existence differently, by showing
that when the total number of players is sufficiently large
we can construct an iterative definition of a dynamically
stable voting equilibrium that is a contraction mapping.
This definition (Equation 2 in Appendix B) is also used
to perform the numerical estimations that follow in the
next section and is discussed in greater detail in that sec-
tion. Furthermore, this definition can be easily utilized
to calculate farsighted evaluations of policy when only a
finite number of rounds of policymaking will occur. The
extension of this model to the setting of a finite number
of rounds is discussed in Appendix B.

Last, it is important to note that under different spec-
ifications of the functions pi a dynamically stable vot-
ing equilibrium is equivalent to other commonly used

42

equilibrium concepts. For the final proposition and corol-
lary of the article I construct a game in which equilibrium
behavior is consistent with behavior generated by dy-
namically stable voting equilibria. In particular, I show
that when individuals vote probabilistically, behavior in
a dynamically stable voting equilibrium is equivalent to
pure strategy Bayesian Markov-perfect Nash equilibrium
behavior in the constructed game (Proposition 4). As a
corollary it follows that when individuals vote determin-
istically, so that pi(vi (x), vi (y)) = 1 if vi (y) ≥ vi (x) and
zero otherwise, then at a dynamically stable voting equi-
librium the collection of functions pi constitute a Markov-
perfect equilibrium. In both cases, the v∗
vector represents
the expected utility functions of the players, and strate-
gies as specified by the functions pi are consistent with
the maximization of these expected utility functions. The
proofs and the construction of the game are relegated to
Appendix B.

Proposition 4. If individuals vote probabilistically, then at
a dynamically stable voting equilibrium, v∗
, the collection of
functions pi are consistent with behavior in a pure strategy
Bayesian Markov-perfect Nash equilibrium of a game, .

A One-Dimensional Example: The Federal

Marriage Amendment and Gay Rights

When the policy space is finite and small it is not diffi-
cult to solve for equilibria analytically. In this subsection
and the next I will present simple analytic examples of
dynamically stable voting equilibria. This first example
depicts a one-dimensional spatial model; the second de-
picts a setting in which there is a majority preference cycle
over a subset of the alternative space. In both examples
I assume that discount factor ␦ = .9 and that voting is
deterministic, with

pi (vi t(x), vi t(y)) =

⎧⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩

if vi t(y) > vi t(x)
if vi t(y) < vi t(x)

otherwise.

1
0
1
2

To motivate this first example, consider the story pre-
sented in the introduction about the political strategies
of gay rights groups after the 2004 elections. Suppose
that there are three political actors in the model: a gay
rights activist (R), a defense-of-marriage activist (D), and
a neutral voter (N). Also, suppose that there are three
possible political outcomes: a court-mandated overturn
of state constitutional amendments banning gay marriage
(“court mandate,” for short), legalization of civil unions
and benefits for same-sex partners (“civil unions”), and a

ELIZABETH MAGGIE PENN

FIGURE 2 A One-Dimensional Example

Gay rights activist (R)

Neutral voter (N)

Defense-of-marriage activist (D)

Court mandate Civil unions

Marriage amendment

federal constitutional amendment banning gay marriage
(“marriage amendment”).

Last, assume that the “marriage amendment” out-
come is currently being strongly forwarded by special
interests, and is three times more likely to arise as a policy
proposal than the other two policy alternatives. Thus,
Q(Marriage amendment) = 3
Q(Court mandate) = 1
5 .

5 , and Q(Civil unions) =

Figure 2 depicts the hypothetical spatial location of
the ideal points of the three players and the locations of
the three policies.

This figure generates Tables 1 and 2, which show
the utility functions of the three players and the sum of
expected utility each policy yields in the long term, at a
dynamically stable voting equilibrium.

Table 2 summarizes the above information by de-
picting individuals’ rankings over the alternatives when
individuals are both shortsighted and farsighted. If Player
i strictly prefers policy x to policy y, it is written x (cid:11) y. If
Player i is indifferent between the two, it is written x ∼ y.
As is consistent with a traditional spatial model, the
neutral voter is always indifferent between legalized civil
unions and a constitutional marriage amendment, and
strictly prefers both of these policies to a court mandate
legalizing gay marriage. However, the gay rights activist,
with ideal point “court mandate,” will strictly prefer to
implement “civil unions” rather than his own ideal point
when he is farsighted. This is because when “marriage
amendment” is more politically salient than the other
two policies (i.e., is more likely to be brought to the floor
as a policy proposal) then the policy that makes the gay
rights activist best off over time is not his ideal point, but
the policy closest to his ideal point that can defeat a con-
stitutional amendment banning gay marriage. Thus, it is
in the activist’s best interest to concede some utility in the
current round in order to prevent his least favorite policy
from being quickly implemented. Finally, the defense-
of-marriage activist strictly prefers “court mandate” to
“civil unions” when he is farsighted, even though “civil
unions” is closer to his ideal point. Loosely speaking, this
is because at “court mandate” there is a 60% chance of
transitioning to “marriage amendment,” the defense-of-
marriage activist’s favorite policy, while at “civil unions”
this chance drops to 30%.

The purpose of this example is to demonstrate sev-
eral key features of this model. First, all three players

FARSIGHTED VOTING

TABLE 1 Individuals’ Payoffs

One-Shot Utility

(cid:9)

(cid:10)

ui

Civil
unions

(cid:10)

(cid:9)

Court

mandate

ui

1
1
2
0

i

R
N
D

3
4
3
4
1
4

Farsighted (Equilibrium) Valuations

43

(cid:10)

(cid:9)

vi

Marriage
amend.
3.478
7.5
6.522

(cid:10)

(cid:9)

(cid:10)

(cid:9)

Marriage
amend.

ui

1
4
3
4
3
4

vi

i

R
N
D

Court

mandate
4.512
7.195
5.488

(cid:10)

(cid:9)

vi

Civil
unions
4.565
7.5
5.435

TABLE 2 Individuals’ Rankings of Alternatives

i

R

N

D

(cid:11)

Court

One-Shot Rankings
(cid:11)
mandate
∼
Civil
unions
Marriage

Civil
unions
Marriage
amendment
(cid:11)
Civil
unions

amendment

(cid:11)
(cid:11)

Marriage

amendment

Court

mandate
Court

mandate

Farsighted Rankings

Civil
unions
Civil
unions

(cid:11)
∼
Marriage

amendment

Court

mandate

(cid:11)
Marriage
amendment
(cid:11)
Court

mandate

(cid:11)
(cid:11)

Marriage

amendment
Court

mandate
Civil
unions

care both about the policy chosen today and about the
types of policies that will replace it in the future. Second,
farsightedness requires taking into account institutional
particularities at any given time. In this example this is
reflected in the exogenous Q term, which captures the
fact that there is currently considerable pressure from in-
terest groups to enact gay marriage bans at the federal
level. And third, farsightedness also requires taking into
account the preferences of other political actors. In the
absence of a defense-of-marriage activist, the gay rights
activist would have pursued a different political strategy.
While this example is obviously highly stylized, it provides
a clear picture of how this model works and demonstrates
that the predictions that the model yields are often quite
intuitive.

A final point to note is that the “farsighted prefer-
ences” conceived of in this model are only farsighted with
respect to the current political climate, or Q term. In this
sense, the model predicts short-term behavior when indi-
viduals care about policy in the long run. In this example
a strategic gay rights activist will not challenge state-level
bans of gay marriage in the federal courts given the current

political climate. Clearly the political climate will change
over time, and these changes will necessarily change the
predictions of the model.

A Condorcet Winner-Turned-Loser

In this next example there are three voters and four al-
ternatives, X = {c, x, y, z}, with one alternative, c, being
a Condorcet winner. The other three alternatives form
a majority preference cycle, with x (cid:11) y, y (cid:11) z, and z
(cid:11) x. The Condorcet winner gives each voter a one-shot
payoff of 2, while the expected value of an alternative
in the majority preference cycle is 3. Thus, while every
player is better off cycling through the alternatives x, y,
z than remaining at Condorcet winner c, c always gives
two players strictly greater utility in the short term than
they would receive at any other policy. Table 3 presents
players’ utility functions and their farsighted valuations
when Q is uniform over all alternatives (i.e., when every
alternative is equally likely to be brought to the floor for a
vote).

TABLE 3 Individuals’ Payoffs

One-Shot Utility

Farsighted (Equilibrium) Valuations

i

1
2
3

ui(c)

ui(x)

ui(y)

ui(z)

2
2
2

8
1
0

1
0
8

0
8
1

i

1
2
3

vi (c)

28.7097
28.7097
28.7097

vi (x)

39.0463
30.109
20.8447

vi (y)

30.109
20.8447
39.0463

vi (z)

20.8447
39.0463
30.109

44

TABLE 4 Individuals’ Rankings of Alternatives

i

1
2
3

One-Shot Rankings

x (cid:11) c (cid:11) y (cid:11) z
z (cid:11) c (cid:11) x (cid:11) y
y (cid:11) c (cid:11) z (cid:11) x

Farsighted Rankings

x (cid:11) y (cid:11) c (cid:11) z
z (cid:11) x (cid:11) c (cid:11) y
y (cid:11) z (cid:11) c (cid:11) x

Table 4 depicts individuals’ rankings over the alter-
natives when individuals are both shortsighted and far-
sighted. As in the previous example, a preference reversal
occurs. This reversal changes Condorcet winner c into a
Condorcet loser in farsighted valuations, or a policy that
is majority-defeated by every other policy.10

4 (2 + 8 + 1 + 0) = 11

The logic behind why the preference reversal occurs
takes two steps to reveal. First note that in the short run
Player 1 prefers c to y, but in the long run this preference is
reversed. However, c and y both lead to similar payoffs in
the subsequent round for Player 1: since every alternative
beats c when voters are farsighted, the expected payoff to
Player 1 in a round following the implementation of c is
1
4 . Player 1’s expected payoff after y
is implemented is the same: y is only defeated by x, and
so Player 1’s expected payoff in the round following im-
plementation of y is 1
4 . However, c and y
lead to different expected payoffs for Player 1 two rounds
out. While y and c both lead to an expected payoff of 11
4
in a subsequent round, y leads to an expected payoff of 57
16
two rounds out, while c leads to an expected payoff of 47
16
two rounds out.11 Thus, while equilibrium evaluations in
this framework capture expected payoffs for an infinite
stream of future policies, the intuition behind why pref-
erence reversals occur can be seen in settings with a finite
(and even small) number of periods.

4 (1) = 11

4 (8) + 3

This example demonstrates that when voters are far-
sighted, outcomes will not necessarily coincide with many

10Roberts (2007) provides an interesting refinement of Condorcet
winners to intertemporal settings that captures those policies that
can also defeat cycles of alternatives. This example works pre-
cisely because the Condorcet winner here does not satisfy Roberts’s
stronger criterion of being a “generalized Condorcet winner.”
Hortala-Vallve (2006) examines logrolling in a model similar to
Roberts’s, but in which a single policy is implemented after re-
peated negotiations.
11To see the logic of this, let y be implemented today, at t = 0.
Tomorrow at t = 1 y will lead to either x (with probability 1
4 ) or
y (with probability 3
4 ), for an expected payoff to Player 1 of 11
4 . At
t = 2 there is a one-fourth chance we will have been at x at t = 1,
which will lead to x with probability 3
4 , for
an expected payoff of 24
4 chance we will have
been at y in the previous round, for an expected payoff at t = 2 of
4 . Thus the expected payoff at t = 2 when y was implemented at
t = 0 is 1

4 and z with probability 1

4 . Similarly, there is a 3

11

4 ) + 3
4 ( 24

4 ) = 57
4 ( 11
16 .

ELIZABETH MAGGIE PENN

commonly known tournament solution concepts includ-
ing the uncovered set, minimal covering set, tournament
equilibrium set, Banks set, largest consistent set, and von
Neumann-Morgenstern stable set, as all of these sets re-
duce to the core, if one exists.12 In the spatial settings
considered in the following section, outcomes do ap-
pear to coincide with elements of the von Neumann-
Morgenstern stable set. However, this observation cannot
be extended to a general preference environment. The
relevant issue is that cardinality of preferences matters in
this setting, whereas tournament solution concepts only
require ordinal preferences. This same issue distinguishes
this model from sophisticated voting (the standard defini-
tion of which is presented in Shepsle and Weingast 1984),
which is defined solely with respect to ordinal prefer-
ences. Sophisticated voting will always yield a Condorcet
winner as the unique voting outcome, if a Condorcet
winner exists. Here a Condorcet winner exists, but it is
chosen with probability zero as an equilibrium policy
outcome.

More generally, this example of a Condorcet winner-
turned-loser provides a good basis of comparison be-
tween this model and the standard sophisticated voting
setup that is frequently used to analyze forward-looking
behavior in legislative settings. Sophisticated voting
describes strategic voting behavior over a finite, prede-
termined sequence of alternatives. As in this model, so-
phisticated voters may seemingly exhibit “preference re-
versals,” in that they may vote in favor of alternatives that
give them lower utility in order to beneficially affect the
future path of play. However, under sophisticated voting,
voters do not actually concede anything; individuals may
vote against policies that they like, but only because they
know that what they like cannot win. In this model, far-
sighted voters may take short-term losses in order to do
better in expectation than they could have in a one-shot
game.13

12These six sets are defined in Miller (1980), Dutta (1988), Schwartz
(1990), Banks (1985), Chwe (1994), and von Neumann and Mor-
genstern (1947), respectively.

13This model also considers a different agenda framework than
the amendment agendas considered under sophisticated voting.
Not only is the proposal process in this model probabilistic, but
agendas move “forward” in that the status quo is replaced at every
round of voting. The standard sophisticated voting setup considers
agendas as fixed orderings of alternatives, with policies sequentially
eliminated through a planned series of pairwise votes. These agen-
das are commonly voted on “backward,” with a fixed status quo
considered last.

FIGURE 3 Player 1’s Value Function

45

a given round is Player 1’s ideal point, (1, 0, 0). Then
whichever policy is chosen to be pitted against the status
quo in the next round will win with near certainty, be-
cause every policy weakly defeats Player 1’s ideal point.
Conversely, the point ( 1
, 0), as an example, is more
2
stable and less likely to be defeated by a new policy. This is
why Player 1’s least favorite policy is at (0, 1
, 1
2 ). Not only
2
does Player 1 get a payoff of zero from this policy, but it
is also a relatively stable outcome, unlikely to be replaced
quickly.

, 1
2

Figure 4 depicts the density over observed policy out-
comes. The darkest areas correspond to the most fre-
quently observed policies. In this example only a small
subset of the total policy space is ever observed with pos-
itive probability. The observed policies appear to consti-
tute a majority-rule core with respect to players’ equilib-
rium value functions. Figure 3 demonstrates this—since
the setting is symmetric, it is clear that each of Player 1’s
most preferred policies is also the most preferred policy
of another player. This example demonstrates that the as-
sumption of farsightedness gives us sharp predictions in

FIGURE 4 Density Over Outcomes

FARSIGHTED VOTING

Numerical Examples in
Two-Dimensional Spaces

follows is a look at several numerical esti-
What
in settings where the policy
mations of this model
space is two-dimensional. The first setting is that of a
three-player constant sum game and the second setting
is that of a three-player spatial model where players have
convex preferences. The graphs that follow depict both
the equilibrium value functions of one of the players and
the equilibrium distribution over observed outcomes.14
In all of the estimations it is assumed that voting is via
majority rule and that players vote deterministically, as in
the previous section. It is also assumed that every player
has the same discount factor, ␦ = 0.9, and that Q is uni-
form over the policy space. Q was chosen to be uniform
simply as a baseline.

Three Players Divide a Dollar

Figure 3 is a graph of Player 1’s value function. The setting
is a three-player divide-the-dollar game; the policy space
equals the set of all divisions of the dollar between three
people and a player’s utility from a particular policy equals
the amount of money he is allocated by that policy. The
policy space is pictured, and Player 1’s ideal point (the
policy x = (1, 0, 0)) is at the top of the simplex. The bottom
of the simplex denotes those policies that give Player 1 no
portion of the dollar. The darkest areas correspond to
the policies that yield the highest values for Player 1, and
the lightest areas denote the policies that yield the lowest
values.

It is apparent that the policies that Player 1 values
most are not near Player 1’s ideal point, but rather those
that divide the dollar about equally between himself and
one other player, or ( 1
2 ). The intuition
2
for this is simple. Suppose that the status quo policy in

, 0) and ( 1
2

, 1
2

, 0, 1

14The estimations were run by discretizing the policy space into
approximately 900 policies (for Example 1) or 260 policies (Exam-
ple 2) and then iterating the mapping defined in equation (2) of
Appendix B until it converged numerically to a dynamically sta-
ble voting equilibrium. The iterations were performed by letting
v 0 = {ui}i∈N and defining v t+1 = g(vt) for t ≥ 0. Convergence
was obtained in every example for a sup norm of .002. Once the
equilibrium value function was found, the equilibrium distribu-
tion over outcomes was found by first drawing two policies from
density Q, pitting them against each other (assuming that voters
vote according to their equilibrium value functions), pitting the
winner against a new policy drawn from Q, pitting this winner
against a new policy drawn from Q, and so on. This process was re-
peated 200,000 times. The frequency with which each policy arose
as an outcome generated the ultimate distribution over observed
outcomes.

ELIZABETH MAGGIE PENN

FIGURE 5 Two-Dimensional Spatial Model

with Circular Preferences

1

2

3

FIGURE 6 Player 1’s Value Function with

Circular Preferences

each player. Then we will consider the case where two of
the three players care more about one issue dimension
than the other.

Figure 5 depicts the spatial location of the ideal points
of the three players and their indifference curves when
preferences are circular. Figure 6 depicts the equilibrium
value function of Player 1, whose ideal point is located at
(0, 1
2 ). Again, the darker areas correspond to the policies
that Player 1 values most highly. Figure 7 depicts the fre-
quency with which each policy is observed as an outcome,
with the most frequent outcomes being darker in color
than the less frequent ones.

FIGURE 7 Density Over Outcomes with

Circular Preferences

46

, 1
2

this divide-the-dollar game. It predicts outcomes corre-
sponding to the set of policies that divide the dollar evenly
between all members of a minimal winning coalition. In
this example, the likelihood of a policy defeating a status
quo such as ( 1
2

, 0) is approximately 1%.

In social choice theory this set of predicted policies is
referred to as the von Neumann-Morgenstern stable set and
is defined by the property that no element in the set strictly
defeats any other element in the set and that any policy
outside the set is strictly defeated by an element inside the
set.15 It is interesting to note that the predictions generated
by this model when Q is uniform closely coincide with
elements of the von Neumann-Morgenstern stable set in
all of the spatial settings considered. However, as the third
section demonstrates, this is not true in general.

It is also interesting to compare this example with a
standard one-shot bargaining model in which players are
recognized with equal probability to propose allocations
of the dollar and if an allocation is approved by a ma-
jority of voters, it goes into effect. In the one-shot model
proposals are made optimally with regard to future op-
timal behavior by players (in the event that a proposal is
rejected). Baron and Ferejohn (1989) demonstrate that
the only stationary subgame-perfect equilibrium of the
one-shot model is for the proposer to give himself ␦(n−1)
of the dollar and to give n−1
n each. In both
models, only a bare majority of players receive a positive
share of the dollar. In Baron and Ferejohn’s model, mem-
bers of the winning coalition receive different allocations
of the dollar depending on whether or not they were the
proposer. Here members of the winning coalition divide
the dollar equally among themselves, as proposals are ex-
ogenous. Of course, ex ante outcomes in the one-shot
model and in this model are the same in expectation.

2 other players ␦

2n

An Asymmetric Two-Dimensional

Spatial Model

This last series of pictures depicts a two-dimensional spa-
tial model, where the ideal points of the three players are
no longer symmetric but are located at (0, 1
2 ), (0, 0), and
(1, 0). The policy space is bounded by the lines connecting
the ideal points of the three players.16 First, preferences
are assumed to be circular so that players are indifferent
between all policies equidistant from their ideal points.
This implies that each issue dimension matters equally to

15These two conditions are termed internal and external stability,
respectively.

16When preferences are circular, this policy space corresponds to the
Pareto set. When preferences are elliptical, as in the next example,
the policy space subsumes the Pareto set.

47

FIGURE 9 Player 1’s Value Function When

Players 2 and 3 Have Elliptical
Preferences

FIGURE 10 Density Over Outcomes When
Players 2 and 3 Have Elliptical
Preferences

FARSIGHTED VOTING

In Figure 6 we can see that Player 1’s highest-valued
alternative is close to the point (0, .25). Although not pic-
tured, the equilibrium “highest-valued” policies of Play-
ers 2 and 3 are (.03, .03) and (.94, 0), respectively. Far-
sightedness induces Players 1 and 3 to prefer policies that
may spark the formation of a coalition between them-
selves and Player 2, the most moderate player. Figure 6
shows that the most observed outcome is approximately
(0, .22), close to the alternative in the stable set corre-
sponding to a coalition between Players 1 and 2, the two
players whose ideal points are closest to each other. In
this example the stable set consists of the points {(0, .19),
(.28, .36), (.19, 0)}, approximately.

In the last example the preferences of Players 2 and 3
are now elliptical rather than circular, and are defined by
the equation

(cid:11)
(ri 1 − x1)2 + 100(ri 2 − x2)2,

ui (x1, x2) = −

where ri = (r i1, r i2) is the ideal point of Player i. Thus,
Players 2 and 3 value the second (or y) dimension of the
policy space 10 times more highly than the first. The pref-
erences of Player 1 have remained unchanged. Figure 8
shows the ideal points of the three players and their indif-
ference curves. The dotted curve represents the contract
curve of Players 1 and 3 and is the upper bound of the
Pareto set.

Interestingly, even though Player 1’s utility function is
the same as in the previous example, his equilibrium value
function is quite different from both his utility function
and his value function in the previous example, when the
preferences of the other two players were circular. Figure 9
shows that Player 1’s most preferred alternative now lies
close to the origin, the ideal point of Player 2. The reason
for this is similar to the intuition behind the example given
earlier. Because Players 2 and 3 both favor policies that
lie close to the x-axis, Player 1 knows that implementing
a policy that appeals to him along the y-dimension is a
lost cause. This is because the point (0, 1
2 ), Player 1’s ideal

point, is the alternative in X that is farthest from the x-
axis. Thus, he is willing to concede a great deal of utility
along the second dimension of the policy space in order
to collude with Player 2 along the first dimension.
The stable set in this example approximately equals
{(.14, .03), (0, .01), (.09, 0)}. Figure 10 shows that there
exists a single alternative, (.09, .02), that arises with near
certainty. This alternative is close to the alternative in the
stable set corresponding to a coalition between Players 2
and 3. As in the previous example, this prediction corre-
sponds to the most socially efficient element of the stable
set; it is the element of the stable set that maximizes the
sum of the players’ utilities.

FIGURE 8 Two-Dimensional Spatial Model

Where Players 2 and 3 Have
Elliptical Preferences

Conclusion

1

2

Societies frequently make decisions that will persist into
the future. Indeed, it is not a stretch to argue that most
policies that people care about are of this form, with ex-
amples being social policies, entitlements, budgets, and
redistributive policies. This article argues that there is
no reason to expect that preferences over these “contin-
uing” policies will be similar to preferences over “once-
and-for-all” policies. This is because, when evaluating

3

48

continuing policies, individuals consider not only their
payoffs from the policies themselves, but also from what
the policies will lead to in the future. I show that when
preferences are considered in this way, surprising out-
comes can emerge in several standard legislative settings.
For example, I demonstrate that a policy that is a Con-
dorcet winner in a one-shot game is selected with proba-
bility zero as a policy outcome when voters are farsighted.
One implication of the model is that its predictions
can give insight into the sorts of coalitions that may
form in settings where policy is implemented over many
rounds. While the existence of stable coalitions is undeni-
ably central to political life, such coalitions can be difficult
to understand from a theoretical perspective. This type of
dynamic environment is perhaps one of the most natural
in which to think of the formation of alliances, and this
article formalizes a common argument for why stability
can arise and persist in the real world. In the theory pre-
sented here, individuals consider the trade-off between
the immediate value of a policy and the long-run stabil-
ity of the coalition implementing that policy. Ultimately,
this consideration leads to the recognition that policies
that fairly divide benefits between members of a winning
coalition leave individual players best off in the long run.
The cooperation that emerges in this model does not rely
on any threat of punishment other than the fact that cur-
rent policies can be replaced by new alternatives.

The theory can also be interpreted as providing an
explanation for why particular coalitions are more likely
to form than others. Both the analytic and numerical ex-
amples demonstrate that farsighted voters will frequently
vote for policies that do not necessarily give them the
highest one-shot payoff. The favorite policies of a far-
sighted voter will depend on a combination of his own
preferences, the preferences of other voters, the voting
power of other voters, and the likelihood with which cer-
tain policies will be brought to the floor. Thus, the model
provides a nuanced characterization of voter considera-
tions that encompasses many different elements of the
institutional environment. It also provides a characteri-
zation of voting behavior that is estimable, because the
model yields distributional predictions.

While the model presented in this article is purely
formal, the theory is applicable to a variety of real-world
legislative settings, as it utilizes only weak assumptions
about the number of voters, their preferences, their re-
spective voting weights, the voting rule, and the policy
space. However, the predictive power of the model will
depend largely on the functional form of the proposal
process Q. This process can be thought of as represent-
ing the likelihood with which particular policies will be
considered by the group in the future. Estimating these

ELIZABETH MAGGIE PENN

likelihoods in real-world situations may provide insight
into the prospective voting behavior of legislators, with
the implication being that the perceived distribution of
future policy considerations may be an omitted variable
in some empirical models of legislative voting.

Appendix A

Assumptions on Individual Vote Choice

Throughout, I assume that for all x, y ∈ X, p(v(x), v(y)),
or the probability of transitioning from status quo x to
policy y, given that x and y are put to a vote, can be written
as the probability of victory of y over x:

p(v(x), v(y)) =

(cid:12)
(cid:2)
(cid:12)

C∈W
×

i(cid:8)∈C

pi (vi (x), vi (y))
i∈C
(1 − pi (vi (x), vi (y)))

(1)

where pi(vi (x), vi (y)) ∈ [0, 1] represents Player i’s prob-
ability of voting for y over x given value function v. It
is assumed that pi is independent of pk for all i, k ∈ N,
that pi(vi (x), vi (y)) + pi(vi (y), vi (x)) = 1, and that pi is
increasing in vi (y) − vi (x).

While the general model defined in the second sec-
tion does not require any additional assumptions on the
functions pi(vi (x), vi (y)), imposing more structure on
these functions enables us to obtain results about equilib-
rium existence (Propositions 1, 2, and 3), and about when
equilibrium behavior is Markov-perfect (Proposition 4).
In particular, the two natural specifications of individ-
ual vote choice I consider are deterministic behavior and
probabilistic behavior. These two specifications are dis-
cussed and defined below. Deterministic voting simply
assumes that individuals vote for y over x if the long-run
payoff of having y implemented today is at least as high
as the long-run payoff of having x implemented today.

Individuals vote deterministically if pi(vi (x),

Definition:
vi (y)) = 1 if vi (y) ≥ vi (x) and zero otherwise.
Probabilistic voting assumes that, at each round of vot-
ing, each individual i receives an unobserved payoff dis-
turbance ␪ ix from casting a vote for policy x ∈ X. As
is standard in models of probabilistic voting, these ␪ ix
terms are assumed to be independently and identically
distributed across all policies x, voters i, and, implicitly,
rounds of voting. Furthermore, the distribution of ␪ ix
has full support and a cumulative distribution function
F that is twice continuously differentiable. If the pay-
off disturbances satisfy all of these properties (and when

FARSIGHTED VOTING

considering probabilistic voting we will assume that they
do) they are termed admissible.

Assuming this payoff structure implies the follow-
ing definition of probabilistic voting, which is shown in
Proposition 4 to be consistent with an assumption that
individuals play Markovian pure strategy Bayesian Nash
equilibria.17

Definition:
ply, probabilistically) if, for all i ∈ N,

Individuals vote F-probabilistically (or sim-

pi (vi (x), vi (y)) = PrF [vi (y) + ␪i y ≥ vi (x) + ␪i x].

∂

|

As discussed in the third section, each of the following
three existence results requires that individuals vote prob-
abilistically. Proposition 2 additionally requires that these
derivatives be uniformly bounded by a specific constant.
This assumption is formalized and discussed below. In
the definition of this assumption, recall that ¯u is the max-
imum value that any individual’s utility function can take,
and u
¯

is the minimum such value.

␦n|¯u−u| for all

∂vk (x) pk(vk(x), vk(y))| < (1−␦)2

Assumption 1.
k ∈ N.
First, note that the bound defined by this condition is very
conservative. Existence may be obtained in far less restric-
tive environments, and in the estimations and analytic ex-
amples presented, equilibria are shown to exist even when
individuals vote deterministically. And second, while this
assumption may seem strange, it can be interpreted in
the context of standard models of probabilistic voting. In
the standard example of a logit agent quantal response
equilibrium in which pi (vi (x), vi (y)) = e ␭vi (y)
e ␭vi (x)+e ␭vi (y) for
some ␭ ≥ 0, this assumption will impose a restriction on
␭ for a fixed n and on n for a fixed ␭.18 More specifically,
in the case of majority rule and assuming that ui(x) ∈ [0,
1] for all i ∈ N and x ∈ X, it will hold whenever

4(1 − ␦)2

.

␦

n␭ <

Since the right-hand side of this equation is always posi-
tive, it follows that for any fixed number of players there
will always exist a positive ␭ that guarantees equilibrium
existence.19

17See McKelvey and Palfrey (1998) and McKelvey and Patty (2006)
for a more thorough presentation of probabilistic voting and agent
quantal response equilibria.
18A logit AQRE assumes that the ␪ ix follow a type one extreme
value distribution.

19The fact that this condition is more likely to hold as n becomes
smaller runs counter to the argument in Proposition 3, which

49

Appendix B
Analytic Results

For the first three propositions we will define a function
g that maps value functions into value functions, or g :
V n → V n with g ={gi}i∈N and g i : V n → V. Specifically,
g i (v(x)) = ui (x) + ␦

(cid:13)

vi (y) p(v(x), v(y))
+ vi (x)(1 − p(v(x), v(y)))Q(y)dy,

y∈X

(2)

with the case of a finite X defined similarly. It is useful
to note that this function g can also be used to consider
farsighted voting when there are only a finite number of
periods of policymaking. Let v 0 = {ui}i∈N and iteratively
define v t+1 = g(vt), t ≥ 0. Then vi t(x) captures Player i’s
valuation of policy x given that t rounds of policymaking
will occur after x is implemented.

Proposition 1.
If X is finite, then there exists a dynam-
ically stable voting equilibrium when individuals vote
probabilistically.

Because ␦ < 1 and utilities ui are bounded by
Proof:
[u, ¯u], it follows that the set of value functions is bounded.
Furthermore, the set of value functions is convex, since
the convex combination of two bounded functions taking
X to R is itself bounded. Last, the set of value functions is
closed, trivially. It follows that the set of value functions
taking X into the real numbers R is a nonempty, closed,
bounded, and convex subset of a finite-dimensional vec-
tor space, RX.

i∈N

i∈N

The mapping g :

Fixed Point Theorem, there exists a v ∈(cid:14)

RX (see equa-
tion 2) is single-valued by definition, and is continuous
by the continuity of every pi(vi (x), vi (y)). By Brouwer’s
RX such
that g(v) = v. Thus, there exists a dynamically stable
(cid:2)
voting equilibrium.

i∈N

RX →(cid:14)

(cid:14)

When policy space X is infinite, Assumption 1 is
needed in order to guarantee existence, along with a def-
inition and a lemma.

proves that for a large enough n, not only will an equilibrium exist,
but that the equilibrium will also be unique. This highlights the
conservativeness of the condition needed in Assumption 1. When
utilizing this assumption in Lemma 1, I find an upper bound on
the derivative of a value function by conservatively setting every
player’s probability of casting a pivotal vote to one, its maximum
possible amount. This is done to simplify the formula for players’
pivot probabilities, which is unwieldy. In Proposition 3, I use an
asymptotic argument to show that these pivot probabilities actually
converge to zero as the number of players becomes large. Thus, the
size of the electorate works in opposite directions in the two proofs.

50
Definition: A set of real-valued functions V∗ ⊂ V is
equicontinuous if for all ⑀ > 0, there exists a ␦ > 0 such
that

␳(s , t) < ␦

and

vi ∈ V∗ ⇒ |vi (s ) − vi (t)| < ⑀.

|∇ p(v(x), v(y))| ≤

ELIZABETH MAGGIE PENN

(cid:17)(cid:17)(cid:2)

(cid:2)

|∇vi (x)|

(cid:18)

×

i∈C

∂vi (x)

k∈C\{i}

pi (vi (x), vi (y))

pk(vk(x), vk(y))

C∈W
× ∂
(cid:12)
×
(cid:12)
(1 − pk(vk(x), vk(y)))
(cid:17)(cid:2)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

pk(vk(x), vk(y))

|∇vi (x)|

∂vi (x)

k(cid:8)∈C

k∈C

i(cid:8)∈C

∂

−

×

pi (vi (x), vi (y))

(cid:18)(cid:18)

(1 − pk(vk(x), vk(y)))

×
(cid:2)

=

k(cid:8)∈C∪i
|∇vi (x)|

∂

pi (vi (x), vi (y))

∂vi (x)

i∈N
× Zi ({ pk(vk(x), vk(y))}k∈N\{i})

(4)
i equal the set of minimal winning coali-

where, letting CM
tions that i is in,

M

To prove Proposition 2, we are concerned in particular
⊂ V n of vectors of differentiable func-
with a set Bn
tions taking X to R whose derivatives are uniformly
bounded by the constant M. This set is equicontinu-
ous; let M be a bound for the derivatives of the func-
tions in BM, and recall that for v ∈ V n, ␳(v(s ), v(t)) =
maxi∈N |vi (s ) − vi (t)|. For an ␣ ∈ X and J equal to
the dimensionality of the policy space, let |∇vi (␣)| =
max j∈J | ∂vi
|. Then, by an extension of the Mean Value
t) < ␦ implies that ␳(v(s ), v(t)) =
Theorem, ␳(s,
maxi |(cid:15)vi (␣)|␳(s , t) ≤ M␦, for some ␣ on the line seg-
ment between s and t. Thus, given ⑀ > 0, the choice ␦ =
⑀/(M + 1) demonstrates that BM, and thus Bn
M, is
equicontinuous.

∂␣ j

Lemma 1.
If Assumption 1 holds, then the function g
maps a closed, bounded, and equicontinuous subset of V n
into itself.

Define g as in equation (2). Boundedness is at-
Proof:
tained because ␦ < 1 and X is compact. Let Bn
M be the
set of vectors of differentiable functions whose derivatives
are uniformly bounded by the constant M. The set Bn
M is
closed. I will show that there exists an M > 0 such that for
any v ∈ V n, if v ∈ Bn
M. By equation (2)
we know that for all i,

M, then g (v) ∈ Bn

(cid:13)

g i (v(x)) = ui (x) + ␦

vi (y) p(v(x), v(y))
+ vi (x)(1 − p(v(x), v(y)))Q(y)dy

y∈X

and thus,
|∇g i (v(x))| ≤ |∇ui (x)| + ␦|∇vi (x)|

(cid:13)

(cid:15)
(cid:13)
1 −

×
y∈X
+ ␦
(vi (y) − vi (x))
|∇ p(v(x), v(y))|Q(y)dy,

y∈X

p(v(x), v(y))Q(y)dy

(cid:16)

(3)

where, letting J equal the dimensionality of the policy
space and letting f be any function of x, |∇ f (x)| =
max j∈J | ∂ f (x)
|. From the definition of p(v(x), v(y)) we
get

∂ x j

Zi ({ pk(vk(x), vk(y))}k∈N\{i})
=

(cid:12)

pk(vk(x), vk(y))
k∈C\{i}
(1 − pk(vk(x), vk(y))).

(cid:2)
(cid:12)

C∈C M
×

i

k(cid:8)∈C

(5)
Zi({pk(vk(x), vk(y))}k∈N\{i}) represents the probabil-
ity that Player i’s vote is pivotal given that all other players
k vote according to the functions pk(vk(x), vk(y)). Moving
back to equation (3), it follows that
|∇g i (v(x))| ≤ |∇ui (x)| + ␦|∇vi (x)|

(cid:16)
(cid:2)

(cid:13)

(cid:15)
(cid:13)
1 −

×
+ ␦

p(v(x), v(y))

y∈X
(vi (y) − vi (x))

Q(y)dy
|∇vk(x)|

k∈N

y∈X
× ∂
× Zk({ pl (vl (x), vl (y))}l∈N\{k})Q(y)dy.

pk(vk(x), vk(y))

∂vk(x)

Let U = maxk∈N,x∈X |∇uk(x)|. U is
assumed to
≥ maxk∈N,x,y∈X |vk(x) −
be bounded. Let B = |¯u−u|
1−␦
vk(y)|, by the assumption that ␦ < 1. Let K = maxk∈N
|
∂vk (x) pk(vk(x), vk(y))|. Last, assume that v(x) ∈ Bn
M, or
that M = maxk∈N,x∈X |∇vk(x)|. Using the fact that equa-
tion (5) is bounded between zero and one, we now get
that

∂

|∇g i (v(x))| ≤ U + ␦M + ␦nK B M.

FARSIGHTED VOTING

It follows that if v ∈ Bn

M, then g (v) ∈ Bn
M if
U + ␦M + ␦nK B M ≤ M,

which holds for

M ≥

when 1 − ␦ − ␦nKB > 0, or
K <

U

1 − ␦ − ␦nK B

1 − ␦
␦nB

.

(6)

As B = |¯u−u|
1−␦ , equation (6) is exactly equal to Assumption
1. It follows that if Assumption 1 holds, then g maps a
closed, bounded, and equicontinuous subset of V n into
(cid:2)
itself.

Proposition 2.
If X is infinite, then there exists a dy-
namically stable voting equilibrium when Assumption 1
holds.

M

→ Bn

M. Since the function g : Bn

Proof:
The Heine-Borel Theorem in a function space
tells us that a subset V∗ ⊂ V is compact if and only if
it is closed, bounded, and equicontinuous.20 Lemma 1
proves that the set of value functions can be restricted to
the compact set Bn
M is
continuous, we need only convexity of the set of value
functions to prove that there exists an equilibrium value
function.
Take the convex combination of any two value func-
M, so that for any ␥ ∈ [0, 1], ␥ v(x) +
tions, v, w ∈ Bn
(1 − ␥) w(x) = z(x). Clearly z is continuous, since
v and w are continuous. Furthermore, z is differen-
tiable, and the derivative of z is bounded by the constant
M. It follows that z ∈ Bn
M is convex. By
Brouwer’s Fixed Point Theorem, there exists a v such that
g(v) = v.
(cid:2)

M, and that Bn

Proposition 3.
If individuals vote probabilistically and
n is “large enough,” then there always exists a unique
equilibrium, regardless of whether X is finite or infinite.

Proof:
The proof is specifically for the case where X
is infinite; the finite case can be proved similarly. First,
note that this proof only requires us to restrict attention
to V = Cb, or the vector space of bounded continuous
real functions on Rm (in other words, value functions
are not required to be differentiable in this proof ). This
space, with the sup norm metric, is a Banach space.21 For

20This theorem is a direct consequence of the Arzela-Ascoli Theo-
rem. See Pugh (2002, 217).

21See Alaprantis and Border (1999, 240).

51
w, z ∈ V n, let ␳(wi , zi ) = maxx∈X |wi (x) − zi (x)|, and
let ␳(w, z) = maxi∈N ␳(wi , zi ). We must show that for
any w, z ∈ V n, ␳(g (w), g (z)) < ␳(w, z), or that g is a
contraction mapping.
let g i : V n → V. Thus, g =
(cid:13)

As in equation (2),

(g 1 , . . . , gn). Recall that
g i (v(x)) = ui (x) + ␦

y∈X

vi (y) p(v(x), v(y))
+ vi (x)(1 − p(v(x), v(y)))Q(y)dy.
(cid:19)
(cid:20)

The components of ∇gi(v(x)) can be defined using the
partial derivatives of gi with respect to the vk:
∂g i (v(x))

(cid:13)

p(v(x), v(y))Q(y)dy

∂vi (x)

= ␦

1 −
(cid:13)
+ ␦

y∈X
(vi (y)−vi (x))

∂p(v(x),v(y))

∂vi (x)

(cid:13)

y∈X
and for all k ∈ N\{i},
∂g i (v(x))
∂vk(x)
∂vk(x)
Using equation (1) we get that for all i ∈ N,
∂p(v(x), v(y))

(vi (y)−vi (x))

= ∂pi (vi (x), vi (y))

=␦

y∈X

∂p(v(x), v(y))

Q(y)dy

(7)

Q(y)dy.
(8)

∂vi (x)

∂vi (x)

× Zi ({ pk(vk(x), vk(y))}k∈N\{i})

(9)
where Zi(·) is defined as in equation (5). Recall that
Zi({pk(vk(x), vk(y))}k∈N\{i}) represents the probability
that Player i’s vote is pivotal given that all other play-
ers k vote according to the functions pk(vk(x), vk(y)).
McKelvey and Patty (2006), in Lemma 1, prove that when
people vote probabilistically and utility functions are uni-
formly bounded, all pivot probabilities Zi(·)→ 0 as n gets
large. Uniform boundedness of utility functions implies
that pk(vk(x), vk(y)) is uniformly bounded away from
zero and one for all k ∈ N; in other words, as additional
voters are added to the electorate, new voters can’t become
arbitrarily close to voting deterministically. Combining
equations (8) and (9), we get for all k ∈ N\{i}
∂g i (v(x))
∂vk(x)

∂pk(vk(x), vk(y))
× Zk({ pl (vl (x), vl (y))}l∈N\{k})Q(y)dy.

(vi (y) − vi (x))

∂vk(x)

= ␦

y∈X

(cid:13)

By the assumption of probabilistic voting, we know
that for all k ∈ N, ∂ pk (vk (x),vk (y))
is bounded by some con-
stant. We also know that the difference | vk(y) − vk(x)|
is bounded by a constant, as ␦ < 1 and utility is bounded.
Since Zj(·) → 0 as n → ∞, it follows that for any ⑀ > 0
there exists an M ∈ N such that for all n >M,

∂v j (x)

52

ELIZABETH MAGGIE PENN

∂g i (v(x))
∂v j (x)

< ⑀.

(cid:13)

(cid:19)
1 −

Using equation (7), by the same logic it follows that
for any ⑀ > 0 there exists an M ∈ N such that for all
n >M,

∂g i (v(x))

∂vi (x)

< ␦

p(v(x), v(y)Q(y)dy

y∈X

(cid:20)

+ ⑀.

It now follows that for n sufficiently large, |∇g(v)| < 1,
where

(cid:15)

(cid:21)(cid:21)(cid:21)(cid:21) ∂g i (v(x))

∂vk(x)

(cid:21)(cid:21)(cid:21)(cid:21)
(cid:16)

.

|∇g (v)| = max
{i, j}∈N

max
x∈X

By the Mean Value Theorem we know that
␳(g (w), g (z)) ≤ ␳(w, z)|∇g (v)|

for some v on the line segment between w and z. Since,
for any v ∈ V n, |∇g (v)| < 1 for n sufficiently large, it
follows that

␳(g (w), g (z)) < ␳(w, z).

Thus, there exists an M ∈ N such that for all n >M, the
function g is a contraction mapping. V n is a complete
metric space, and thus g has a unique fixed point. More-
over, this fixed point can be approximated by repeated
iteration of the mapping g on any element w of V n : g ␩ =
g ◦ g ◦ · · · ◦ g(w) → v∗
(cid:2)

as ␩→ ∞.

The final proposition and corollary show that we can
construct a game, , such that behavior in a dynami-
cally stable voting equilibrium is consistent with Bayesian
Markov-perfect Nash equilibrium behavior in . Define
 as follows:

• There is a collection of players, N = {0 , . . . , n},
with Player 0 assumed to be nature and the re-
maining players being voters.
• There is a collection of states, S = X × X, with
generic element s. At a given time t, s t = (x t , yt) ∈
S can be interpreted as a status quo policy xt and a
proposal, yt , to be pitted against the status quo.
• A player’s type is denoted ␪ i = (␪ ix, ␪ iy), with ␪ =
i=1. Let ␻ = (s, ␪) be a type profile. For each
{␪ i}n
i > 0, let i = R2 and  = ×n
i=1
i. Let F denote
the twice-continuously differentiable cumulative
distribution function of a probability distribution
possessing full support on i and ¯F ≡ F n denote
the cumulative distribution function of the result-
ing product measure on .
• A history at time t is a sequence of type profiles and
actions, ht = {␻0, a1, ␻1 , . . . , ␻t−1, at−1, ␻t}. Let
Ht denote the set of all possible histories at time t

0

0({ht−1}) = X × , where at

and H denote the set of all possible histories. Note
that the histories are from the voters’ perspective,
so that h0 = {␻0}. Below, the true initial history,
h = ∅, is used only for the consideration of nature’s
determination of the initial type profile, ␻0.
• At each time t each Player i > 0 knows history ht
i (ht ) = {0, 1}. An action
and has action space At
i (ht ) = 1 is a vote by Player i for yt over xt . At t
at
0(∅) = X × X × . At t > 0 Player 0 has
= 0, A0
= (yt ,
action space At
␪t ). Let at (ht ) be a profile of the actions taken at
time t.
• Each Player i > 0 is represented by an information
structure, Ii , which is a partition of H such that
any element of Ii , Ii , contains histories of exactly
one length. Denoting the subset of Ii containing
histories of any length t by It
i and denoting the
type of Player i in period t following history h by
␪h
i , the information structure is assumed to satisfy
the following condition. For any two histories ht
and ˆht , ht and ˆht are in the same element of It
i if
and only if
1. ht−1 = ˆht−1,
2. s t = ˆs t, and
3. ␪h
i

= ␪ ˆh
i .

In words, players are assumed to observe all past
actions and type profiles, the current state, and
their own current type, but not other players’ cur-
rent types. (Note that the assumption that players
observe each other’s past types is unimportant, as
I will be examining equilibrium strategies that do
not depend upon any players’ past types.)
• A strategy for Player i is a mapping from informa-
tion sets into the space of probability distributions
over actions, denoted ␴t
i (ht)) for i
i
> 0. Let ˜Q be the probability measure generated
0(ht) = ˜Q × ¯F at all
by pdf Q. It is assumed that ␴t
0 (∅) = ˜Q × ˜Q × ¯F .
t > 0, and that for t = 0, ␴0
␴t denotes a strategy profile at time t.
• Payoffs for each player are defined by the value
␦t[ui (x t) + ␪t
i at
• For t > 0, ␻t depends on ␻t−1 and at−1 in the
following way: xt = xt−1 if and only if for some C
∈ W (the collection of winning coalitions), at−1
=
0 for all i ∈ C. If not, then xt = yt−1. Note that yt
is chosen by nature, as in the definition of at
0.

functions vi (h) =(cid:22)∞

: Ht → (At

t=0

i ].

i

We are now ready to prove the last proposition, which is
straightforward given the setup of the game. It requires the
definition of probabilistic voting and payoff disturbances
presented in Appendix A.

FARSIGHTED VOTING

53

Proposition 4.
If individuals vote probabilistically and
payoff disturbances are admissible, then at a dynamically
stable voting equilibrium, v∗
, the collection of functions
pi are consistent with behavior in a pure strategy Bayesian
Markov-perfect Nash equilibrium of .

Corollary 1. If individuals vote deterministically, then at a
dynamically stable voting equilibrium, v∗
, the collection
of functions pi are consistent with behavior in a Markov-
perfect equilibrium of .

Proof: Markov perfection requires that if two histories
ht and ˆht have the same value of type profile ␻t , then
␴i (ht) = ␴i ( ˆht) for all i. In considering Markov-perfect
equilibria suppose that strategies ␴ i are measurable with
respect to ␻i ≡ (x, y, ␪ i). In other words, players condition
only on the current state (x, y) and their current type, ␪ i.
Let ␾(x, y | ␴) be the probability that y defeats x, given
that voters vote according to strategies ␴. Let ␾i(x, y | ai,
␪ i, ␴−i) be the probability that y defeats x conditional on
type realization ␪ i and i’s vote choice ai. Note that the
information structure Ii and fact that the ␪ i’s are i.i.d. in
each time period imply that ␾i(x, y | ai, ␪ i, ␴−i) = ␾i(x,
y | ai, ␪(cid:7)
i. In other words, ␪ i only affects
i’s action; it does not affect his beliefs about other players’
actions.

i, ␴−i) for all ␪ i, ␪(cid:7)

Clearly, ␾ is measurable with respect to ␻ (i.e., ␾ is
history-independent). Since we are considering a mono-
tonic game, we know that ␾i(x, y | 1, ␪ i, ␴−i) ≥ ␾i(x,
y | 0, ␪ i, ␴−i). In other words, if Player i votes for y over x,
then the likelihood that y defeats x is weakly greater than
it would have been had Player i voted for x over y.
fine ␴v∗

For a dynamically stable voting equilibrium, v∗

as follows:

, de-

i

(cid:23)

i (␻i ) =
␴v∗

if v∗

i (x) + ␪i x > v∗

i (y) + ␪i y ,

0
1 otherwise.

i (x), v∗

All that remains to be shown is that v∗
i is equal to i’s true
expected value given ␴v∗
(cid:24)
. To see this, write the probability
i (y)) =
i (v∗
that i votes for y over x given ␴v∗
as p␴
R2 ␴v∗
i (x, y, ␪i ) f (␪i )d␪i .
= pi, as utilized in the
It can be verified that p␴
(through transition probability p(v∗
definition of v∗
i
(x),
v∗
(y))). Thus, v∗
i is Player i’s true expected payoff condi-
tional on strategy profile ␴v∗
represents
a sequentially rational (i.e., Bayes Nash equilibrium) pro-
file of strategies for the game . Since ␴v∗
is by definition
Markovian with respect to ␻i ≡ (x, y, ␪ i), we can con-
clude that, for any dynamically stable voting equilibrium,
v∗
, the strategy profile ␴v∗
is a Bayesian Markov-perfect
(cid:2)
Nash equilibrium.

. It follows that ␴v∗

i

The following corollary follows immediately from
the fact that when individuals vote deterministically (as
defined in Appendix A) then ␪ ix = 0 for all i ∈ N and x
∈ X.