Studying the History of Those Who Would Rather Forget: Oral History and the 
Experience of Slavery
Author(s): Martin A. Klein 
Source: History in Africa, 1989, Vol. 16 (1989), pp. 209-217  
Published by: Cambridge University Press 

Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/3171785

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide 
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and 
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. 
 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at 
https://about.jstor.org/terms

Cambridge University Press is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access 
to History in Africa

(cid:0)170.140.142.252 on Sun, 05 Sep 2021 20:29:54 UTC(cid:0)

(cid:0) 

This content downloaded from 

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 STUDYING THE HISTORY OF THOSE

 WHO WOULD RATHER FORGET:

 ORAL HISTORY AND THE EXPERIENCE OF SLAVERY1

 Martin A. Klein
 University of Toronto

 Research on oral history tends to be concerned with two very different types

 of sources. I would refer to them as oral traditions and oral data. Oral tradi-
 tions are formally preserved, not always as narratives, but in some fixed form.2
 They can, for example, be passed on as songs, as drum names, or as proverbs.
 They are part of the collective memory of the group and get passed on from gen-
 eration to generation. They serve a legitimating function and must of necessity
 be analyzed in terms of who and what they legitimate. There is also a large
 body of data at any time which individuals hold in memory, data about indi-
 vidual experience, data that consist essentially of things that people have
 seen and experienced. It is not preserved in any formal way because it is not de-
 liberately structured for legitimation or communication. Popular writers in
 western countries have tapped this rather rich treasure trove in recent years to
 write about the Detression, two World Wars, and the Spanish Civil War
 among other things. Oral tradition is limited in what it passes on, and once
 the transition from generation to generation is made, the amount of data is for-
 ever circumscribed.

 Oral data are largely concerned with people describing things they experi-
 enced. They are valid primarily during the lifetime of those being interrogat-
 ed. They are absolutely essential for the reconstruction of the history of
 peoples without history, those low down in any social order who have little to
 legitimate. To be sure, even lower-class families preserve traditions which
 serve some kind of legitimating function. This would be especially true of im-
 migrant families or of families whose sense of who or what they are is defined
 by the accomplishments of a hard-working early immigrant or by their sense of
 being different.4 Even here, when the first generation dies, what we have is
 the encapsulation of a large fund of oral data into a kind of family tradition.
 Furthermore, in North America this family tradition is often preserved because

 History in Africa 16 (1989), 209-217

(cid:0)170.140.142.252 on Sun, 05 Sep 2021 20:29:54 UTC(cid:0)

(cid:0) 

This content downloaded from 

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 210 MARTIN A. KLEIN

 the culture honors those who have risen from modest origins. A major difference
 between studying slavery in North America and in Africa is that in North
 America those who have risen from modest origins tend to be proud of it. It is
 those modest origins that magnify our accomplishments or those of our fathers
 and mothers. Achieved status is more important than ascribed status.

 There are also lower-class traditions. Thus, working-class history in Eu-

 rope and North America has its heroes, its songs, and its stories. Much of the
 quest for a "people's history" involves the search for these traditions.5 In a
 similar way, caste groups within Africa often preserve distinct traditions.6
 Though often looked down on by others, these caste groups have traditions that
 affirm their roles in society and afford them a certain status and dignity.
 Blacksmiths and leatherworkers have a pride in vocation, and griots in the im-
 portance of their role. Most groups have their traditions. Individuals have
 memories. The two must be treated differently.

 The major problem in dealing with individual oral data is the problem of

 memory.7 Memory is highly selective in that none of us is capable of perceiving
 or preserving the fullness of any event, even an event that took place shortly
 before the description. Any two persons asked to describe an event that both ex-
 perienced would give different responses. Furthermore, memory can often select
 the most trivial things. We often remember what we were eating at a given
 meal, but not what was said, what we were wearing, but not what happened.8
 However rich the informant's memories seem, they inevitably represent only a
 part of reality, and sometimes ignore the things we want to know.

 There is an even greater problem. Memory also distorts. The mind is never

 a tabula rasa. It perceives and holds in memory selectively, and that selection
 reflects the values and psychic makeup of the perceiver. Older people often se-
 lect and rework memory, sometimes incorporating events that never took place.
 These memories are often shaped by subsequent events or by subsequent concerns.
 In 1984, when the fortieth anniversary of D-Day was being celebrated, Ronald
 Reagan reminisced about a postwar visit to Europe, which apparently had
 never taken place. He seems to have believed he had visited Europe at the
 time, and perhaps had in some movie role he played.

 Distortion often involves a subconscious effort either to suppress some event

 we are ashamed of or to increase our own importance. Both on the individual
 level and on the collective level, there are perceptions of the past which are
 linked to ideology and which become more important than the reality of histo-
 ry as it may actually have happened. All of this means that memory must be
 tapped with caution. One piece of data does not a generalization make. This
 does not mean we should write off such data. For many questions they are indis-
 pensable. It simply means that we should interview numerous informants and
 we should evaluate any interview data sceptically.

 For over fifteen years my major research project has been a study of slavery
 and French colonial rule in west Africa. This has developed into a study which
 seeks to look at slavery from the middle of the nineteenth to the middle of the
 twentieth century. As part of this project I have interviewed in the Kaymor re-

(cid:0)170.140.142.252 on Sun, 05 Sep 2021 20:29:54 UTC(cid:0)

(cid:0) 

This content downloaded from 

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 ORAL HISTORY AND THE EXPERIENCE OF SLAVERY 211

 gion of Saalum in Senegal and I have had some interviews done for me by an as-
 sistant, Aly Kampo, in Masina in Mali.9 Graduate students working under my
 direction have also interviewed in Kajoor (Senegal)10 and among the Maraka
 (Mali).l1 The information on slavery in these collections have come more from
 memories of life experiences than from formal traditions. Slaves are present in
 oral traditions of the larger community, but only in passing. They are men-
 tioned as followers, companions, or victims. Traditions are concerned with the
 deeds of leaders, rulers, and founding heroes. Oral traditions give us little evi-
 dence about slavery; slaves have few traditions of their own.

 Perhaps the most striking conclusion from these interviews is that in these
 societies those of slave descent do not like to recognize their slave origins even
 where the person's origins are well-known. This contrasts to the Afro-
 American quest for "roots." In the Kaymor interviews only two of my infor-
 mants spoke of slavery in the first person. Both were persons who had some
 status in spite of slave origins. The first was my oldest informant, a man who
 claimed to be 103 years old and who was not at all servile.12 The second was a
 man whose status depended on exploiting his servile origins. He organized
 work parties and celebrations, served as a spokesman for the more powerful,
 and enjoyed some of the license former slaves still have. Still, even he indicat-
 ed servile origins only in referring to a grandparent who had been pawned. In
 other cases, informants of slave origin tended to be very reticent. Villages of
 former slaves tried to hide their humble origins, in at least one case making up
 a fictional list of chiefs. In another case, an informant who had been suggested
 to me as a "good" informant, clammed up when a young man who had attached
 himself to my entourage blurted out unexpectedly: "Who is your master?" Our
 strategy had been to interview on a range of questions and never confront the in-
 formant with our awareness of his status. In fact, as time went on I became more
 and more reticent about invading the privacy of people who found some of my
 questions difficult.13

 In the Masina interviews Kampo interviewed two informants of slave de-

 scent. Neither gave much information. One was interviewed as part of a large
 collective interview. Most of his answers were a single sentence. He claimed
 not to know the origin of his parents or the name of his "master." Though he
 had served in forced labor camps, he spoke of neither death nor flights common
 to tales of forced labor. He was almost the only informant who said he knew
 nothing about pawning.14 He had no idea whether most of the slaves left their
 masters or stayed at the time of emancipation. The second informant was some-
 what more forthcoming, but still went beyond his own experience only when
 talking about Aguibou Tall, the one-time chief of Bandiagara, a subject on
 which he added nothing to what others had told us. He was a weaver who
 lived in and worked with a tailor. He knew that his parents came from Djenne
 and was interesting while talking about relationships. His master was present
 and may well have shaped the interview by his presence. Many of the respons-
 es talked about their being "brothers" and about faithfulness. Speaking about
 his parents, he said

(cid:0)170.140.142.252 on Sun, 05 Sep 2021 20:29:54 UTC(cid:0)

(cid:0) 

This content downloaded from 

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 212 MARTIN A. KLEIN

 They were treated like children of their master. Even after emancipa-
 tion, my father lived with his master. They then came together to
 Konn where I was born. Like my father, I am also faithful to my mas-
 ters.... [After emancipation] many slaves went back to their native vil-
 lages. My father did not go back to Djenn6. He remained faithful to his
 master.

 It is clear that the relationship was a relatively benign one. The man was
 a former French soldier who had returned voluntarily to the "master's" house-
 hold. Good questioning by Kampo also brought out the nature of the man's sub-
 ordination, but it was not easy. It came out in references to praising his master,
 to his obligation to respect all nobles, and in discussions of marriage.

 Richard Roberts did seventy interviews among the Maraka in 1976/77, but

 only two were with slaves. Neither of these had much information on the
 slave community. Both were fairly short interviews, valuable mostly for a de-
 scription of slavery and of the slave's experience. Bernard Moitt found only one
 informant of slave origin in Kajoor, and this person never openly admitted it.
 Other scholars using interviews have often discovered only after numerous in-
 terviews that an informant was of slave origin.1' If I do it again, I will focus
 more on biographies, on getting informants of slave descent to talk about them-
 selves, and on multiple visits.1

 The problem of the servile informant is not simply reticence. Slaves have

 little history. They often cannot give much of a genealogy. Many can tell you
 where their fathers came from, but some cannot or will not tell even that. They
 will sometimes give a general picture of the hegemonic ideology. In a sense,
 servile informants can say a lot about "the world the masters made." They tend
 to say very little about "the world the slaves made."17 Their involvement in
 the traditions of the larger community is marginal, but their involvement in a
 tradition of their own community, if they have a community, is even more lim-
 ited. This is in striking contrast to other low-status groups, who can be jealous
 of their rights and status. Griots will chat informally about great griots of the
 past. Blackmsmiths can tell you where they came from and how they got
 where they are. Slaves cannot. I am not clear that slaves can or will talk about
 events that happened within the slave community.18 Only once, early in my
 career, did I have a former slave talk about a slave revolt.1"

 The reason for this failure lies in the nature of slavery itself. Slaves are

 essentially people without history. This flows from a characteristic of slaves.
 "Amon slaves," Paul Riesman writes, "marriage does not confer father-
 hood." u Meillassoux elaborates:

 The non-paternity of the slave proceeds...from his economic use.... Placed out-
 side social relations, he acquires, ipso facto, the characteristics of a non-
 relative.... The right of a slave to live with a woman, to create around himself
 what seems to be a family, to act like a free man, is a revocable privilege, which
 distinguishes this slave from others and attaches him more strongly to his mas-
 ter.21

This content downloaded from 

(cid:0)f:ffff:ffff:ffff:ffff:ffff:ffff:ffff on Thu, 01 Jan 1976 12:34:56 UTC 

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 ORAL HISTORY AND THE EXPERIENCE OF SLAVERY 213

 Slaves could neither bequeath to their children nor control them. The mas-

 ter had the right to claim the slave child as soon as he or she was old enough to
 work. Children were to be the most important subject of conflict when slaves
 left their masters during the Banamba exodus of 1906 and after.22 This kept
 the slave family atomized and dependent. The slave was an isolated individ-
 ual. The child did not look for the parent for an inheritance or for bridewealth.
 The parent could not look to the child for security in old age. The slave men-
 age's best hope of finding such security lay in buying a slave for themselves or
 taking a second wife.23

 The only alternative was to depend on the goodwill and generosity of the
 master's family. This was the essence of slavery. That atomization of the
 slave community reinforced the control of the master. Family existed for
 slaves, but it lacked much of the meaning it had for all others. This aspect of
 slavery was linked to other institutions designed to prevent the emergence of a
 self-conscious servile community and to keep the slave as a dependent part of
 the master's community. Naming traditions, the possibility of manumission or
 improved status within slavery, and dependence on the master's generosity all
 operated to prevent the emergence of a self-conscious community. Such efforts
 were not completely successful. Where slaves were numerous, they formed sep-
 arate communities which had their own traditions.24 These traditions do not,
 however, seem to be very elaborate or reliable.

 One result of the limited development of slave traditions is that slaves are

 often invisible in the oral historical record. Students of oral traditions have
 written extensively about feedback, which is the way in which the written
 tradition comes to shape the oral.25 Little has been written about the reverse,
 the way in which the reluctance of humble people to confront what is seen as
 shameful can shape the written record. I would like to deal here with such a
 case. It is a case where the reluctance of informants is reinforced by a reluctance
 of the French administration to put on paper information that would be embar-
 rassing to it. This involves the hinterland of Dakar, the area that before the
 First World War was the major producer of peanuts in Senegal.

 This is the area which has today and had in 1900 the highest population

 density in Senegal.26 The high density area is not where we expect it, at the
 center of an established kingdom, but rather in a frontier area, straddling the
 borders of the precolonial kingdoms of Kajoor, Siin, and Bawol, an area of con-
 flict not only among those three kingdoms, but also between them and small re-
 silient islands of earlier peoples. It is quite possible that some of this modern
 population density comes from free peasant migration. In this thesis Mamadou
 Diouf describes the movement of peasants into areas under French sovereignty
 around Dakar and St. Louis during the 1870s and 1880s.27 There are, however,
 other population movements that have left rather faint but visible tracks in
 the historic record.

 The 1870s and 1880s were a period of massive enslavement in the interior of
 west Africa. Aided by newer and more efficient weapons, the forces of CUmar,

(cid:0)170.140.142.252 on Sun, 05 Sep 2021 20:29:54 UTC(cid:0)

(cid:0) 

This content downloaded from 

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 214 MARTIN A. KLEIN

 Tieba, Samori, and other conquerors swept clear large areas on a scale not known
 even during the period of the Atlantic slave trade. These slaves were sold for
 the guns and horses that these armies needed.28 Clearly, someone was willing
 to pay, although prices were sometimes low. For slaves to be sold, there had to
 be a market; that is to say, someone had to be willing to pay for the slaves.
 During the early years of French rule in the Soudan, slaves were taxed. There
 are a limited number of commercial reports available for this period, but they
 indicate that for much of the Soudan, slaves were far and away the most im-
 portant item of trade, often up to 70% or 80% of the value taxed. Furthermore,
 one set of reports suggests a massive movement of slaves into Senegal. It is for
 Medine in the upper Senegal river, and it contains eight monthly reports during
 a period from December 1888 to July 1889. These eight reports show that 10,130
 slaves moved into Senegal.29 Projected over a year, they would give us a figure
 of somewhere between 12,000 and 14,000 slaves moving through--four or five
 times the number purchased in the upper Senegal river at the peak of the At-
 lantic slave trade.

 Where could all these slaves go? Who had the money and the incentive to
 buy these massive numbers? The only place that could absorb them was the
 Peanut Basin. Particularly important was the development of the areas along
 the line of rail after the completion of the Dakar-St. Louis railroad in 1885.
 Labor was in short supply and Piedmontese laborers had been brought in for the
 construction of the railroad. This was also a period when between 1,000 and
 2,000 slaves a year were being freed in St. Louis.30 The laws on emancipation
 were being enforced reluctantly and under pressure from French public opinion.
 Along the line of rail, few slaves were being freed. The administration avoid-
 ed the obligation to free slaves by placing Kajoor and other areas under protec-
 torate. Then it signed treaties with the chiefs providing for an end to the slave
 trade and regulating the treatment of slaves. The administration had to hide
 the extent of slavery in territories under French authority. This means that
 there are few references to slavery and the slave trade during this period, just
 enough to know that it was large, that it continued into the twentieth century,
 and that it went largely to Kajoor and western Bawol. Thus, in 1904 an admin-
 istrator in Dagana described the movement of slaves downriver to Dagana:
 "The river crossed, the wretched having been sold, are immediately taken into
 the interior by the juula, who sell them principally in Kajoor, Bawol and the
 outskirts of St. Louis."31 During the same period, reports from Kaedi on the
 Mauritanian side of the river suggest that almost all slave sales there were to
 merchants from Kajoor: "Moors coming from the desert sell large numbers of
 slaves to juula coming from all parts of the colony, particularly from Cayor.
 Some of them buy such large numbers that they can only be trading."32 Moitt's
 informants confirmed this when they referred to slave imports as Bambara and
 described as the major route as from Dagana down through Njambur into Ka-
 joor.33

 What happened to these slaves when slavery began to break down after
 1900? It is possible that significant numbers returned to the Soudan, though

(cid:0)170.140.142.252 on Sun, 05 Sep 2021 20:29:54 UTC(cid:0)

(cid:0) 

This content downloaded from 

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 ORAL HISTORY AND THE EXPERIENCE OF SLAVERY 215

 there is no evidence of anything like the Banamba exodus. It is probable that
 most either stayed where they were or joined the Mouride migration to the
 frontier of agricultural settlement in the Senegalese interior. Some entered the
 nascent working class in the port cities and along the line of rail. What is im-
 portant to us here is that they left behind rather faint tracks. Senegalese oral
 tradition remembers Lat Joor's heroic last battle against the French, but not his
 letters to the French about his slaves. Oral tradition remembers vividly an en-
 counter between Lat Joor and the Mouride leader Amadou Bamba, but it says
 little about where most of Amadou Bamba's disciples came from.34 The prob-
 lem is compounded by the fact that there is so little slave tradition to put into
 the mix.

 Can we still tap oral data for information about slavery? Is there a signifi-

 cant amount of oral data out there? I am not sure. My best slave informants are
 now dead. There are few former slaves alive who can describe anything that
 happened before 1905. We should be collecting biographies, but even biogra-
 phies will be of little help for understanding the crucial period between 1890
 and 1910, although they might be useful in describing processes of transition to
 freedom, but mostly for the war and interwar periods. In dealing with them,
 we have to recognize that certain changes-for example, the creation of a
 stable family life-were rapid. Two other kinds of tradition would be useful.
 The first would be traditions of resistance. Memories of slave revolt would be
 interesting, and might still exist, especially where the revolt ended with
 slaves forming autonomous communities in place or near the site of enslavement,
 that is, in communities that still take pride in having asserted themselves.
 The second would be traditions of migration. There was in the early twentieth
 century a vast movement of groups of people-for example, the return to Was-
 soulou in southern Mali of large populations taken prisoner by Samori. Many
 returned in groups. Many had been enslaved for short periods of time. Do they,
 or similar groups elsewhere in Africa, remember and have they passed on tra-
 ditions of that migration? I have some doubts, but it would be worth the effort
 to try.

 NOTES

 1. I am grateful to Joseph Miller, Richard Roberts, and Bogumil Jewsiewicki for

 comments on an earlier version of this paper. I am also indebted for years of support to
 the Social Science and Humanities Research Council of Canada and to the Woodrow
 Wilson Center for a fruitful stay, where some of these ideas germinated.

 2. The different kinds of tradition are most fully explored in Jan Vansina, Oral Tra-

 dition as History (Madison, 1985).

 3. See, for example, two popular practitioners, Studs Terkel, Hard Times. An Oral

 History of the Great Depression (New York, 1970) or Barry Broadfoot, Years of Sorrow.
 TheStory of Japanese Canadians in World War II (Toronto, 1977).

 4. A lot of excellent work is being done now in the field of immigrant studies, where

(cid:0)170.140.142.252 on Sun, 05 Sep 2021 20:29:54 UTC(cid:0)

(cid:0) 

This content downloaded from 

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 216 MARTIN A. KLEIN

 even the study of the ethnic press cannot pick up the richness of the data that lie in
 memory. My thoughts on this subject have profited from conversations with Robert
 Harney of Toronto's Multicultural History Society and with some of his students.

 5. See the journal History Workshop, and Raphael Samuel, ed., People's History

 and Scoialist Theory (London, 1981); Paul Thompson, The Voice of the Past (Oxford,
 1978).

 6. See, for example, Patrick McNaughton, The Mande Blacksmiths: Knowledge,

 Power and Art in West Africa (Bloomington, 1985), esp. ch. 1 and 5, and Judith Irvine,
 "Caste and Communication in a Wolof Village," Ph.D., 1973.

 7. On memory see Vansina, Oral Tradition, ch. 1. "It is in a way amazing," Vansina

 writes, "that the relation of a memory to what actually happened can be so close." Van-
 sina, "Memory and Oral Tradition" in Joseph Miller, ed., The African Past Speaks
 (Folkestone, 1980), 275.

 8. A number of years ago, when I was trying to date the decline of the leatherwork-

 ers' caste, I decided to see if people could remember their first pair of shoes. I was quite
 startled when the first person I asked gave me a precise answer: It was in 1937. In fact
 an event that seemed trivial to me may well have been more important to this man than
 the events I normally study.

 9. My Senegalese interviews are available at the Archives of Traditional Music at

 Indiana University and at the Archives Culturelles in Dakar. The Malian interviews are
 available at the Institut des Sciences Humaines in Bamako.

 10. Bernard Moitt, "Peanut Production and Social Change in the Dakar Hinterland:

 Kajoor and Bawol, 1840-1940," Ph.D., University of Toronto, 1983.

 11. Richard Roberts, "Maraka Historical Texts: Transcripts of Oral Data Collected
 in the Middle Niger Valley of the Republic of Mali," 3 vols., unpublished texts, 1976-84.
 See also his Warriors, Merchants and Slaves (Stanford, 1987).

 12. The former slave was justly proud of his accomplishments. By accident we also

 interviewed a number of the man's "master's" family. The old man had made the pil-
 grimage to Mecca. By tradition, freed men are not supposed to make the pilgrimage
 until they have bought their freedom under traditional law. The former master com-
 plained that the old man did not ask the "master" to set a price. He simply put on the
 table what he thought was the right price and announced that. he was going. At the
 same time, it is striking that a man who had founded a hamlet and accumulated
 enough cattle to pay for such a trip was till so bound by custom.

 13. At one point I became convinced that a young man who had helped us a lot and

 had become a friend was a slave origin. I thought it might be interesting to talk to him
 about the meaning of servile origins today, but the issue is one that younger and better-
 educated Senegalese want to set behind them. My assistant refused either to confirm
 or dispel my suspicions. As I became aware that the proposed interview would be un-
 pleasant for both my assistant and our friend, I dropped the idea.

 14. Pawning was widespread in the region and increased dramatically during the
 depressions. See Richard Roberts and Martin Klein, "The Resurgence of Pawning in
 French West Africa During the Depression of the 1930's," African Economic History 16
 (1987), 23-38. In general, informants talked much more freely about the resurgence of
 pawning than about the persistence of slavery.

 15. Claire Robertson, "Post-Proclamation Slavery in Accra: A Female Affair?" in

 M.A. Klein and C. Robertson, eds., Women and Slavery in Africa (Madison, 1983), 230;
 Paul Lovejoy and Jan Hogendorn, "Oral Data Collection and the Economic History of
 the Central Sudan," Savanna, 8 (1978).

(cid:0)170.140.142.252 on Sun, 05 Sep 2021 20:29:54 UTC(cid:0)

(cid:0) 

This content downloaded from 

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 ORAL HISTORY AND THE EXPERIENCE OF SLAVERY 217

 16. The continuing work of Paul Lovejoy and Jan Hogendorn on northern Nigeria
 should be interesting in this regard. See their article in Richard Roberts and Suzanne
 Miers, eds., The End of Slavery in Africa (Madison, 1988).

 17. These terms come from the brilliant works of Eugene Genovese, The World the

 Slaveholders Made (New York, 1969) and Roll Jordan Roll. The World the Slaves Made
 (New York, 1972).

 18. One successful exploration of slave tradition is Jean Pierre Olivier de Sardan,

 Quand nos pares etaient captifs. Recits paysans du Niger (Paris, 1976). Olivier de Sar-
 dan's success may have been that it was an old slave village, where a sense of communi-
 ty had coalesced. Then too, he clearly worked a long time in a single community.

 19. The case was an interesting one. I was not yet researching slavery, and in fact

 was just beginning to experiment with oral sources. Soon after I started asking ques-
 tions in a Mandinka village in the Gambia, two men started arguing. It turned out one
 was a descendant of the leader of a slave revolt, essentially a refusal of slaves to contin-
 ue working, in the last years before conquest. The other descended from the chief at
 that period. The case was interesting because it indicated how servile communities
 could function as corporate entities. I never did get a full history of the revolt, though I
 later found references to it in the archives.

 20. Freedom in Fulani Social Life. (Chicago, 1977); Original French edition pub-

 lished in 1974.

 21. Anthropologie de l'esclavage. Le ventre de fer et d'argent (Paris, 1986), 173-74.
 22. Richard Roberts and Martin Klein, "The Banamba Slave Exodus of 1905 and the

 Decline of Slavery in the Western Sudan, JAH, 22 (1981), 375-94.

 23. Roberts, Warriors, 127; Martin Klein, "Women and Slavery in the Western Sou-

 dan" in Klein/Robertson, Women and Slavery in Africa, 80-84.

 24. See here again Olivier de Sardan, Quand nos pHres.
 25. David Henige, The Chronology of Oral Tradition (Oxford, 1974), 95-120; idem.,

 "The Problem of Feedback in Oral Tradition: Four Examples from the Fante Coast-
 lands," JAH, 14 (1973), 223-35.

 26. See Atlas National du Sedngal (Dakar, 1977), 76-79.
 27. Mamadou Diouf, "Le Kajoor au XIXe siecle," (Thise du 3e cycle, Universite de

 Paris I, 1980), 391-97.

 28. Klein, "The Slave Trade in the Western Sudan During the 19th Century," paper
 presented to the Workshop on the Long-Distance trade in Slaves across the Sahara and
 the Black Sea in the 19th Century, Bellaggio, Italy, December 1988.

 29. Commercial repots, Medine, Archives Nationales du Mali, 1 Q 70.
 30. Frangois Renault, L'abolition de l'esclavage au Senigal. L'attitude de
 t'administration franqaise, 1848-1905 (Paris, 1972). See also Archives Nationales. Sec-
 tion Outre-Mer (France), 15 c, 15 d, 17, and Archives du Senegal, K 11.

 31. Report on slavery, Dagana, by R. Manetche (1904), ARS, K 18. See also Comm.
 Medine to Comm. Kayes, 14 Aug. 1898, ARS 15 G 116 and Political Report, Kayes, 2
 March 1899, ANM 1 E 44.

 32. Comm. Kaedi to Dir. Affaires Indigines, 30 Dec. 1889, ARS, Fonds Sen6gal, 2 D

 136. At this time, it was legal to import slaves into Senegal for use, but not for sale.

 33. Moitt, "Peanut Production."
 34. Most Senegalese will tell you that most of the Mouride converts were of servile

 origin.

This content downloaded from 

(cid:0)170.140.142.252 on Sun, 05 Sep 2021 20:29:54 UTC(cid:0)

(cid:0) 

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

