“All This to Capture One Man” 

Captivity & Consequence of a Rescued Slave In Post-Abolition 

East Africa

William Dinneen

History 365W - Slavery & Abolition in Africa

Prof. Mariana Candido

December 2021

1

Abstract
Despite the legal abolition of the slave trade by Britain in 1807, Africa in 
the  19th  Century  saw  no  end  to  slavery.  Using  Reverend  Charles  New’s 
account of a single slave rescued by a British ship in Pangani in 1874, this 
essay  explores  the  possible  life  of  a  seemingly  freed  slave  in  a  post-
abolition East Africa. It seeks to tell the story of his captivity, rescue, and 
subsequent struggle, highlighting the perpetuation of slavery both in Africa 
and  in  the  life  of  a  freed  individual.  I  will  examine  Charles  New’s 
assumption that the man would be re-enslaved and demonstrate that—in the 
same  way,  abolition  of  the  Transatlantic  Slave  Trade  did  little  to  end 
slavery within Africa—the rescue of this man did little to end the nightmare 
of slavery within his life.

Introduction
The  Eastward  winds  in  late  October  on  the  Swahili  Coast  of  East Africa  marked  the 
beginning of the Monsoon season. These trade winds blew across the Pemba & Zanzibar 
Channels and into the Indian Ocean. Crews of slave smugglers, who had returned to the 
East Coast during the summer, prepared their shallow-draught dhows to take advantage 
of the season and sail to the Pemba and Zanzibar islands. Just over one year earlier—in 
June 1873—the Sultan of Zanzibar had been coerced into signing a British treaty, legally 
abolishing the slave trade within his domain. Already for decades before, the smugglers 
had been bombarded by the Royal British Navy in their crusade against the slave trade. 
Before this, the slave market based around Zanzibar had been the busiest slave market of 
the entire Western Indian Ocean. Despite the reforms, the demand for labor from this 
market’s clove-producing plantations in Zanzibar and the Middle East was still more than 

2

enough reason for the smugglers to risk the journey.1

A map of the Zanzibar Archipelago2

In the Autumn of 1874, one such slaving dhow set out for the Island of Pemba. Aside 
from the crew, aboard the ill-suited, undecked vessel was a single captive man to be sold 
as a slave. Likely having trekked East across the African continent, this man continued 
East  aboard  the  dhow.  However,  before  the  ship  could  reach  its  destination  it  was 
captured by the British Navy, and the man was taken to Pangani for his fate to be decided 
in  court.  To  call  this  capture  a  “rescue”  would  be  a  ﬂawed  interpretation,  because, 
although  he  was  saved  from  the  miserable  dhow,  his  future  was  entirely  uncertain. 
Whether  the  man  joined  the  British  Navy  himself,  became  a  normal  laborer,  or  was 

1 Woulﬁn, Daniel, “Slaves, Trains, and Missionaries: British Moral Imperialism and the Development of Precolonial 
East Africa, 1873-1901,” Stony Brook University, (2011); Cheriau, Raphaël, “The French Flag in Zanzibar Waters 
1860s–1900s:  Abolition  and  Imperial  Rivalry  in  the  Western  Indian  Ocean,”  The  Journal  of  Imperial  and 
Commonwealth  History,  49,  no.  1  (2020);  Doulton,  Lindsay  “The  Royal  Navy’s  anti-slavery  campaign  in  the 
western Indian Ocean, c. 1860-1890: race, empire and identity,” University of Hull (2010)
2  Misachi,  John.  “Zanzibar  Archipelago.”  WorldAtlas,  WorldAtlas,  23  Mar.  2021,  https://www.worldatlas.com/
islands/zanzibar-archipelago.html. 

3

recaptured as a slave was not guaranteed by the British.3 In the same way abolition of the 
Transatlantic Slave Trade years before did little to end slavery within Africa—the rescue 
of this man did little to guarantee an end to the nightmare of slavery within his life.

In the second half of the 19th Century, slaving dhows were a common sight. From 1860 
through 1900, the British Navy captured over 1,000 and “rescued” about 12,000 slaves in 
the Indian Ocean.4 In the ﬁrst half of the century, starting in 1807, the British Navy had 
undergone a similar campaign in the Atlantic Ocean, dismantling the Transatlantic Slave 
Trade. However, these efforts did little to actually end slavery within Africa. By the end 
of the 19th century, millions of Africans across the continent remained trapped in a   slave 
system deeply rooted in the economic, social, and political structures of Africa. Many of 
the laws created to abolish slavery were in fact only facades that served to legally abolish 
the institution without truly ending it.5 The story of this man, “rescued” by the British 
Navy on his way to Pemba, is representative of these issues surrounding abolition. His 
story is my extrapolation of the account given by the Reverend Charles New published in 
1875 in the Anti-Slavery Reporter, a British abolitionist newspaper. In a description of 
New’s trip to East Africa, he relates,

When at Pangani, a little north of Zanzibar, just as I was about to leave the 
town for Chogue, some distance up the river, an English boat came into the 
harbour. They belonged to one of our cruisers; had been away from their 

3 Charles New. “The Slave Trade In East Africa.” Anti-Slavery Monthly Reporter; Under the Sanction of the British 
and  Foreign  Anti-Slavery  Society,  January  1,  1875,  113+.  Slavery  and  Anti-Slavery:  A  Transnational  Archive; 
Alpers,  Edward,  “Flight  to  Freedom:  Escape  from  Slavery  among  Bonded Africans  in  the  Indian  Ocean  world, 
c.1750–1962,” Slavery & Abolition, 24, no. 2 (2003); Stilwell, Sean. “The End of Slavery in Africa.” Chapter. In 
Slavery  and  Slaving  in  African  History,  176–214.  New Approaches  to African  History.  Cambridge:  Cambridge 
University Press, 2014; McMahon, Elisabeth. “‘A Solitary Tree Builds Not’: Heshima, Community, and Shifting 
Identity  in  Postemancipation  Pemba  Island.”  The  International  Journal  of  African  Historical  Studies  39,  no.  2 
(2006): 197–219
4  Cheriau,  Raphaël,  “The  French  Flag  in  Zanzibar  Waters  1860s–1900s: Abolition  and  Imperial  Rivalry  in  the 
Western Indian Ocean,” The Journal of Imperial and Commonwealth History, 49, no. 1 (2020); 
5 Doulton, Lindsay “The Royal Navy’s anti-slavery campaign in the western Indian Ocean, c. 1860-1890: race, 
empire and identity,” University of Hull (2010);  Stilwell, Sean. “The End of Slavery in Africa.” Chapter. In Slavery 
and Slaving in African History, 176–214. New Approaches to African History. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 2014

4

ship ten days, and had at last made a capture. The prize was a miserable 
dhow, a small undecked-boat, and was almost foundering. Her captain gave 
an unsatisfactory account of her, and one slave was discovered on board, a 
young man, who assured his captors that he was a slave, and was being 
taken to Pemba for sale. 6

His  account  proceeds  to  brieﬂy  describe  the  process  that  the  man  went  through 
immediately afterward. In disgust, New questions the virtues of the British Abolition, 
“What! I thought, all this to capture one man, who will probably be enslaved again before 
long!”

The Journey To The Coast
Whenever the man closed his eyes he couldn’t help but imagine his home in the South 
Ashanti region of Ghana. Although he had been a slave there, the thought of green cocoa 
orchards still held some nostalgia. These trees had dominated his life for so long as he 
had been forced by the Ashanti elite to pour countless hours into the production of the 
yellow seed pods. However, cocoa processing was nothing compared to his following 
situation. As the status of slavery under British colonial rule had grown more uncertain 
on the Gold Coast of Africa, the man’s owner decided to sell the man to merchants from 
East Africa. 7

6 Charles New. “The Slave Trade In East Africa.” Anti-Slavery Monthly Reporter; Under the Sanction of the British 
and Foreign Anti-Slavery Society, January 1, 1875, 113+. Slavery and Anti-Slavery: A Transnational Archive
7 Stilwell, Sean. “The End of Slavery in Africa.” Chapter. In Slavery and Slaving in African History, 176–214. New 
Approaches to African History. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2014

5

A Slave-Dhow, about 1880–18958

The journey East was brutal and unforgiving. The man had no idea where he was going. 
His caravan carried him and dozens of other captive men and women through weeks of 
desert heat. He was not simply a passenger on this journey, and he was forced to work to 
ensure his own delivery. After months of this torture, the caravan arrived on the other side 
of the continent. The man knew no one and did not recognize the city around him. He 
was completely at the mercy of his new masters. After catching a glimpse of the ocean, 
the man entered a stone building, where he would wait in captivity until his departure.9

After the 1807 abolition of the Transatlantic Slave Trade, many captives, like this man,  
kept their status as slaves within Africa. Colonial governments, while largely effective at 
preventing the maritime trading of humans, were completely unequipped to deal with 
continental  slave  raiding  and  dealing. After  1807,  the  number  of  slaves  disembarked 
annually  in  North  America  quickly  dropped  from  the  tens  of  thousands  to  only 

8 “A Slave-Dhow”, J. Paul Getty Museum (about 1880–1895)
9 Anderson, Lisa. “Ninteenth-Century Reform in Ottoman Libya.” International Journal of Middle East Studies, vol. 
16, no. 3, 1984, pp. 325–348.

6

hundreds.  10At  the  same  time,  the  number  of  slaves  disembarked  annually  in  Africa 
jumped from only hundreds to thousands. Similarly, the focus of the abolitionists, at least 
at  ﬁrst,  was  limited  to  West  Africa.  After  the  1807  abolition,  the  number  of  slaves 
embarked annually in South-East Africa jumped from about 5,000 to 20,000+. Demand 
for labour was not solved by the British abolition, and thus within Africa, and especially 
East Africa, the prevalence of slavery rose.11
In this sense, by the time this man arrived in East Africa, West Africa was already over 
half  a  century  ahead  in  terms  of  abolition.  For  that  half  century,  slaves  had  been 
streaming  into  the  interior  of Africa,  trying  to  match  the  increasing  demand  from  the 
growing Ottoman presence in the Middle East and the Indian Ocean markets. Desert treks 
were not uncommon during this time period, especially within the Trans-Saharan trade 
from the West Coast of Africa towards the North East. However, such treks were not 
limited to the northern continent. For example, in the 1830s, the British abolished slavery 
in the Cape Colony of South Africa causing a mass migration of labour North into the 
interior of Africa, out of the reach of the British. The man fell victim to this failure of 
abolition to deal with the deeply ingrained roots of slavery, and so he was driven by the 
abolition on the Western Coast to enter the trade on the Eastern Coast.12
On the Ship of the Smugglers
For  a  few  days  the  man  was  kept  in  the  port  city  of  Kilwa,  just  South  of  Zanzibar. 
Eventually, he was taken out of his chambers and brought to the banks of the nearby 
Wami river. The man had never been on a ship before and was surprised to see several 
tiny and worn out vessels waiting to be loaded. He watched as he saw others like himself
—severely malnourished and wearing only rags—disappear into the hulls of the small 
dhows. As he considered their situation, he was grabbed and pulled onto the ﬁnal dhow in 

10 This trend was only true for North America and the British Caribbean. Slaves disembarked in Brazil and other 
Western colonies actually increased after the British abolition.
11 Slave Voyages Database,  https://www.slavevoyages.org
12 Stilwell, Sean. “The End of Slavery in Africa.” Chapter. In Slavery and Slaving in African History, 176–214. New 
Approaches to African History. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2014; Woulﬁn, Daniel, “Slaves, Trains, 
and Missionaries: British Moral Imperialism and the Development of Precolonial East Africa, 1873-1901,” Stony 
Brook University, (2011)

7

the ﬂeet. He was the only human cargo onboard, alongside various other trade goods. 
Before  he  could  be  overcome  with  terror  at  the  idea  of  leaving  his  continent  entirely 
behind, he was dragged to his feet and handed a rope. On this voyage again he would 
have to contribute to his own delivery.13

Map of principal Indian Ocean slave routes14

Aboard the dhow, the man was told where they were going: the Island of Pemba. He was 
told that he was likely to be used as a laborer to produce cloves and coconuts for the 
Omani  market  given  his  previous  experience  on  cocoa  orchards.  These  names  meant 

13 Doulton, Lindsay “The Royal Navy’s anti-slavery campaign in the western Indian Ocean, c. 1860-1890: race, 
empire and identity,” University of Hull (2010)
14 Doulton, Lindsay “The Royal Navy’s anti-slavery campaign in the western Indian Ocean, c. 1860-1890: race, 
empire and identity,” University of Hull (2010)

8

nothing to him and he had no choice either way. On the second day of sailing, the man 
was awoken to the sound of shouts. A British Cruiser had been spotted on the horizon.

As the Transatlantic Slave Trade decreased in size and the slave trade shifted eastward in 
general, the slave trade in the Indian Ocean increased in size. Roughly 500 slaving dhows 
every year were captured by the British on their way out of Zanzibar after 1850, and this 
number certainly does not represent every dhow that set sail. During this period, Zanzibar 
was the busiest slave market in the entire Western Indian Ocean, but that is not to say that 
it was the only market. More example, in the 1870s, about 10,000 slaves were transported 
into  Madagascar  annually.  Enslaved  females  were  often  sent  to  be  concubines  or 
domestic slaves in Arabia. Although enslaved laborers in the Eastern Regions tended to 
have  more  diverse  roles—including  military,  administrative,  agriculture,  irrigation, 
domestic,  mariners,  dock  workers—most  remained  on  the  Western African  islands  to 
work on plantations. This was due in a large part to the colonization of the East African 
coast by Omani Arabs in the nineteenth century. The Omani Sultan and other Arab elites 
even  moved  into  the  area  themselves.  On  Pemba  especially,  slave  labor  was  used  to 
produce cloves and coconuts, which proved incredibly valuable. 15
Cloves were especially valuable. They were introduced to the islands in 1810, and within 
a couple of decades Zanzibar and Pemba led the world in the production of the spice. 
However, cloves were an expensive product to produce and new plantations required new 
workers. In order to continue increasing their wealth, Omani plantation owners became 
increasingly  dependent  on  their  ties  to  the  slaving  caravans  on  the  Swahili  coast. 
Deservedly, these island received their title “spice isles,” at one point producing 70% of 
the worlds cloves. It was an industry that depended upon the use of slaves. 16

15  Cheriau,  Raphaël,  “The  French  Flag  in  Zanzibar Waters  1860s–1900s: Abolition  and  Imperial  Rivalry  in  the 
Western Indian Ocean,” The Journal of Imperial and Commonwealth History, 49, no. 1 (2020);
Doulton, Lindsay “The Royal Navy’s anti-slavery campaign in the western Indian Ocean, c. 1860-1890: race, empire 
and identity,” University of Hull (2010)
16 McMahon, Elisabeth. “‘Siendi’ (I Won’t Go): Concubines’ Activism in the Abolition of Slavery in the Zanzibar 
Protectorate.” Slavery & Abolition, vol. 41, no. 2, 2019, pp. 395–412.

9

The control of such a valuable trade meant that the global naval balance of power was 
threatened.  In  the  context  of  the  Napoleonic Wars,  Britain  did  not  want  to  allow  that 
balance to be shifted, and thus they reinvested their efforts into countering non-European 
powers, like the Ottoman Empire, in the Indian Ocean. The Indian Ocean competition 
only became more signiﬁcant with the opening of the Suez Canal in 1869. Realizing that 
their geopolitical superiority was at stake, and that the Zanzibar trade depended upon 
slavery, Britain proposed a treaty in 1871 to limit slavery in Zanzibar. Already, the British 
Navy had been campaigning to capture slaving dhows on their way in and out of the 
Zanzibar archipelago.17

A Dhow Spotted On The Horizon
For nine days the Royal British Cruiser patrolled the waters surrounding the Zanzibar 
archipelago. It’s triple masted deck towered over the miniature dhows that it hunted. For 
the sailors aboard, the search for slaving dhows was done partly for sport and partly for 
glory. To them, the Arab slave traders were no better than lawless Barbary pirates. The 
captain of this particular vessel had grown worried by day seven that the crew might fail  
to capture a ship on this voyage. He read the newspapers from back home. He knew 
about the gloriﬁed stories. He had read the accounts of the HMS Turquoise and the HMS 
Griffon in their desperate ﬁreﬁghts with Arab ships and subsequent liberation of hundreds 
of slaves. He wanted such a story for himself.18

17  Woulﬁn,  Daniel,  “Slaves,  Trains,  and  Missionaries:  British  Moral  Imperialism  and  the  Development  of 
Precolonial East Africa, 1873-1901,” Stony Brook University, (2011)
18 Doulton, Lindsay “The Royal Navy’s anti-slavery campaign in the western Indian Ocean, c. 1860-1890: race, 
empire and identity,” University of Hull (2010)

10

‘The East African slave trade: recent conﬂicts with slave dhows’, ILN, 17 December 

1881 19

On the morning of the ninth day the captain’s wish was granted—a small slaving dhow 
running  towards  Pemba  had  been  sighted.  The  captain  whispered  “Jack’s  Dive,”  his 
favorite poem, to himself,

A Sail was in the distance seen
Freighted, twas thought with slaves
For when she sighted our brave ship
Fast ﬂed the Arab dhow
And after her in chase we sped

19 Doulton, Lindsay “The Royal Navy’s anti-slavery campaign in the western Indian Ocean, c. 1860-1890: race, 
empire and identity,” University of Hull (2010)

11

Hurrah we have her now.20

Quickly  the  cruiser  descended  upon  the  small  dhow.  The  captain  and  the  crew  were 
received. Finally, they could liberate this dhow and return to shore.

In  1869,  British  Commodore  Leopold  Health  commented  that  Britain  would  have  to 
double or triple their presence in the Indian Ocean to truly stop the Zanzibar slave trade. 
For decades before the British had been struggling to deal with the small, efﬁcient, and 
clandestine dhows that undermined their efforts at abolishing the slave trade in the Indian 
Ocean. The campaign had become an international issue, causing tension between Britain 
and  other  major  powers  like  the  French  and  Ottomans.  As  the  dhows  supplied  the 
Ottoman demand for labor and the dhows took advantage of the French ﬂag to avoid 
capture  by  British  ships,  the  British  grew  more  and  more  desperate  to  increase  their 
power  in  the  Indian  ocean,  respond  to  the  public  English  demands  of  abolition,  and 
replace  some  of  the  economic  value  they  had  lost  in  their  now  independent  North 
American colonies.21
This situation continued until 1873 when the Sultan of Zanzibar ﬁnally agreed—with the 
help  of  a  British  Naval  blockade—to  sign  a  treaty  abolishing  the  slave  trade  in  his 
domain. Afterwards,  the  British  ship,  the  90-gun  205  ft  HMS  London  was  stationed 
nearby  Zanzibar  to  ensure  enforcement.  While  this  greatly  increased  British  Naval 
presence,  it  did  not  immediately  end  the  slave  trade.  Such  an  increase  in  power 
simultaneously brought an increase in responsibility. Questions about what to do about 
captured  slaves  emerged  and  the  Anti-Slavery  Society  in  Britain  deemed  the  treaty 
ineffective due to overland trade routes that remained out of reach of Zanzibar’s control. 
In addition to all of this, the key commodity produced in the Zanzibar Archipelago—
cloves—relied heavily on the use of slaves. In many respects, the treaty and subsequent 

20 Book of poems written by Richard Cotten onboard HMS Comus, Paciﬁc Station, dated 7 June 1883; Taken from 
Doulton, Lindsay “The Royal Navy’s anti-slavery campaign in the western Indian Ocean, c. 1860-1890: race, empire 
and identity,” University of Hull (2010)
21  Cheriau,  Raphaël,  “The  French  Flag  in  Zanzibar Waters  1860s–1900s: Abolition  and  Imperial  Rivalry  in  the 
Western Indian Ocean,” The Journal of Imperial and Commonwealth History, 49, no. 1 (2020)

12

increase  in  British  naval  presences  actually  did  little  to  ﬁx  the  underlying  issued  of 
slavery in the area.22
The Dhow Is Captured
The tiny slaving dhow put up little resistance. It was utterly outmatched by the ﬁrepower 
of the British navy. Quickly the British sailors boarded the small vessel and demanded to 
see their papers. When the smugglers failed to produce any, the captain proceeded with 
his search of the vessel, checking for any suspicious cargo. To the disappointment of his 
vanity, he found only a single captive man. Nonetheless, he proceeded with the legal 
process. Using his interpreter, he began by taking statements from each person aboard.

 ‘The East African slave trade: rescued female slaves and children questioned aboard a British ship of 

22  Woulﬁn,  Daniel,  “Slaves,  Trains,  and  Missionaries:  British  Moral  Imperialism  and  the  Development  of 
Precolonial East Africa, 1873-1901,” Stony Brook University, (2011);
Cheriau, Raphaël, “The French Flag in Zanzibar Waters 1860s–1900s: Abolition and Imperial Rivalry in the Western 
Indian Ocean,” The Journal of Imperial and Commonwealth History, 49, no. 1 (2020)

13

war’, 23 February 1889 (*note, the British captain likely did not actually speak Swahili)23

The captive man did not know exactly what was going on. The only thing he did know 
for certain was that he was on his way to Pemba as a slave, and when asked by the 
foreign captain, the man insisted that this was the truth. He was then washed, fed, and 
taken aboard the larger vessel. He asked his new captors if he would become free, and 
they told him that he would need to wait for shore. They sailed for one full day, back the 
way they came, and arrived at a city called Pangani on the Eastern coast of Africa. The 
captain brought the slave into a building and left him there alone.

The process of liberating a slaving dhow was well established by the end of the 19th 
Century. It had come out of decades of heated debate in Britain about the legal status of 
rescued slaves and the responsibility of Britain to deal with them. Earlier in the century, 
most of these slaves were brought to live Mauritius or the Seychelle Islands. Some were 
also brought to British colonies in India and received Western education. Eventually these 
Africans would return to Mombasa and form an ex-slave community called Freretown. 
However,  their  situation  was  unique,  and  most  liberated  men  did  not  share  the  same 
luxury. Instead, the belief by the late 19th century, as one British ofﬁcer put it, “the slaves, 
when taken from the slave-dhows, are generally in a ﬁlthy state, and ripe for an outbreak 
of epidemic disease; it is therefore necessary that our cruisers should be relieved from 
their custody as quickly as possible.”24

This  mindset  deﬁned  the  role  of  Naval  Captains  in  the  late  19th  Century.  Generally, 
antislavery patrols managed a variety of roles beyond simply capturing slaving dhows.  
First they would inspect any paper a dhow should provide. Next, they would search the 
ship, rescue any captive and gather any evidence, and ﬁnally they would either bring the 
rescued men to court or hold a trial aboard the ship. In court—called the Vice Admiralty 

23 Doulton, Lindsay “The Royal Navy’s anti-slavery campaign in the western Indian Ocean, c. 1860-1890: race, 
empire and identity,” University of Hull (2010)
24 Doulton, Lindsay “The Royal Navy’s anti-slavery campaign in the western Indian Ocean, c. 1860-1890: race, 
empire and identity,” University of Hull (2010)

14

Court in Zanzibar—the slave traders and captives underwent trial. If the captives could 
prove  that  their  trade  broke  any  established  treaties,  then  they  would  be  awarded  a 
“freedom ticket” which formally declared them as a free person. In reality, this freedom 
ticket was merely a reminder of the British inability to successfully guarantee freedom in 
locations with sanctioned slavery. 25

Liberation
The  man  sat  through  his  trial  as  he  was  supposed  to.  Each  time  he  was  asked,  he 
reiterated his story. He told the litigators of his journey from the Gold Coast, across the 
continent, and onto the slaving dhow headed to Pemba. The trial was not difﬁcult. In only 
a few hours his freedom was granted. Legally he had become a free man. He exited the 
courthouse into a city he didn’t know, surrounded by languages he didn’t speak, and with 
no idea how to return home. He was still wearing the rags he had aboard the dhow. He 
clutched the ticket that signiﬁed his freedom and walked towards the coast.
                                                                                                    

After  being  liberated  by  the  British  court  system,  a  free  man  faced  an  entirely  new 
struggle. The simple fact of abolition did not change any of the other underlying realities 
of African society. The economy was still heavily based on plantations and those needed 
labor to be successful. However, the options of a free man were still far better than those 
of a slave. After abolition or liberation, many slaves on the East Coast of Africa sought 
inclusion  into  things  they  had  not  been  allowed  as  a  slave.  Some  sought  property 
ownership, joined social or religious groups, dressed like free people, and contributed to 
community  events.  Many  got  jobs  doing  similar  things  that  they  might  have  done  as 
slaves, but in much better conditions. For example, in Zanzibar, some free men were able 
to negotiate their labor requirements to work fewer days per week. Conscious of what it 
means  to  be  tied  to  a  single  landholder,  many  slaves  sought  work  from  multiple 
landowners at once or tried to become small owners themselves. Their freedom meant the 

25 Doulton, Lindsay “The Royal Navy’s anti-slavery campaign in the western Indian Ocean, c. 1860-1890: race, 
empire and identity,” University of Hull (2010)

15

potential for independence, and thus they were wary of becoming too dependent on any 
one landowner.26
However, they also faced many legal barriers and the transition to inclusion was quite 
slow.   In 1871, a British Captain claimed that Captain Philip Colomb stated: “I have 
always thought that the worst thing that could happen to a slave was to be captured by 
one of Her Majesty’s ships; because there is no opening after that. He spends a happy 
time  on  board  the  ship,  but  his  after  career  is  quite  a  doubtful  one.”27  While  such 
sentiments  held  a  kernel  of  truth,  they  are  not  entirely  true.  Some  attempts,  such  as 
Freretown  in  Mombasa,  were  made  to  create  full  communities  for  liberated  slaves. 
However, such communities could cause tension in the area and often became sources of 
conﬂict. Sometimes, slaves who had been freed by a Navy ship would join that ship as a 
crew member. In some cases they would become wage laborers on British plantations, 
employed privately with families, or become dock workers. Of course, in some cases as 
well, freed men were recaptured and returned to a life of slavery. We cannot not know 
exactly what became of the man from Charles New’s story. While some options were 
clearly available, the path to freedom should not be considered an easy path.28
Conclusion

The legal abolition of slavery in the 19th Century did not mean the end of slavery in 
Africa. Outright slavery existed in many places within Africa, and in many places the 
prevalence of slavery increased. The end of the Transatlantic Trade cause a shift eastward 
in the slave trade, and abolishing the Indian Trade required drastic new efforts from the 
British.  Charles  New’s  account  of  the  man  captured  and  released  in  Pangani  is 
demonstrative of this confused post-abolition climate. Even today, the facts of the slave 
trade  in  East Africa  are  often  ignored.  In  Zanzibar  for  example,  it  remains  taboo  to 

26 Stilwell, Sean. “The End of Slavery in Africa.” Chapter. In Slavery and Slaving in African History, 176–214. New 
Approaches to African History. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2014
27 Doulton, Lindsay “The Royal Navy’s anti-slavery campaign in the western Indian Ocean, c. 1860-1890: 
race, empire and identity,” University of Hull (2010)
28  Woulﬁn,  Daniel,  “Slaves,  Trains,  and  Missionaries:  British  Moral  Imperialism  and  the  Development  of 
Precolonial East Africa, 1873-1901,” Stony Brook University, (2011)

16

discuss the realities of slavery.29 The legacy of such a massive institution has thus still not 
entirely disappeared. Similarly, it would be foolish to assume that the man in Charles 
New’s story could simply forget about his past as a slave after being liberated, or that his 
life would become easy.

29 O’Dell, Emily Jane. “Yesterday Is Not Gone.” Journal of Global Slavery, vol. 5, no. 3, 2020, pp. 357–401.

17

